Department of Development and Environmental Services (DDES)
900 Oakesdale Avenue Southwest   ●   Renton, Washington 98055-1219    ●    206-296-6600   ●   TTY 206-296-7217
DDES Customer
Information Bulletin #
35
Permits For Relocating
a Building
●  FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS  ●
Visit the DDES Web site at
www.metrokc.gov/ddes
for more information
King County DDES has created customer information bulletins to inform
the general public about the effect of codes and regulations on their
projects. These bulletins are not intended to be complete statements of
all laws and rules and should not be used as substitutes for them. If
conflicts and questions arise, current codes and regulations are final
authority. Because the codes and regulations may be revised or
amended at any time, consult King County staff to be sure you
understand all requirements before beginning work. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to ensure that the project meets all requirements of
applicable codes and regulations.
Alternative formats available upon request
Building Relocation Permits For Residential and Commercial Structures
This bulletin outlines what is required to obtain a permit to relocate a building that will be used
for residential or commercial purposes.  Two separate permits are needed for building
relocation:  The first permit, a Relocation Investigation Permit, provides for inspection of the
building to be relocated.  If the building is determined to be eligible for relocation, then the
second permit, a Building Relocation Permit, may be obtained.
All building relocation permits must comply with the following State and King County codes and
regulations:
1) 
Uniform Building Code;
2) 
Uniform Mechanical Code;
3) 
Uniform Fire Code;
4) 
King County Code [Title 21A of the King County Code (KCC)];
5) 
King County Critical Areas Ordinance and Administrative Rules [Chapter 21A.24 of the 
King County Code (KCC)];
6) 
King County Surface Water Design Manual;
7) 
King County Road Standards;
8) 
Washington State Energy Code and Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality Code;
9) 
Shoreline Management Act;
10) Other King County Ordinances and Regulations; and
11) Other Washington State Ordinances and Regulations.
Building Relocation Investigation Permits
If customers are planning to relocate a building in King County, an assessment of that building
and the prospective site for relocation is required before applying for a building permit.  This
assessment is accomplished through a Relocation Investigation Permit.
Customers may apply for a Relocation Investigation Permit at the Permit Center of the King
County Department of Development and Environmental Services (DDES) offices in Renton,
Washington, or at one of our satellite offices.  For the locations and operating hours of satellite
offices, call 206-296-6600.  To schedule an appointment to apply for a Relocation Investigation
Permit, please call the Permit Center Appointment Desk at 206-296-6797.
Bulletin 35
11/14/03
Page 1 of 3
Permits For Relocating a Building
Bulletin 35
To apply for a Relocation Investigation Permit, customers must provide the following
information:
▪
The current address, Parcel Number and location of the building to be relocated;
▪
The legal description or Parcel Number of the site where the building is to be relocated;
▪
An Affidavit of Application; and
▪
A site plan of the site, showing the current location of the building.
An inspection report regarding the proposed building relocation will be prepared and given to
the project applicant.
Building Relocation Permits
If the relocation investigation indicates that a proposed building is eligible for relocation,
customers may then apply for a Building Relocation Permit.  This permit will be processed and
reviewed in the same way as a permit for a new residential or commercial project and will be
subject to any code reviews and restrictions applicable to the new site.  These reviews and
restrictions may include SEPA, critical areas, shorelines, drainage, traffic, noise, etc.
To apply for a Building Relocation Permit, please call 206-296-6797 to schedule a permit
application appointment.  When coming for an appointment, be sure to bring a copy of the
Relocation Investigation Permit Report.  In addition, customers must provide all the information
required for a complete permit application.  (See Bulletin 9, Obtaining a Residential Building
Permit, for complete application requirements for single-family residential projects, and see
Bulletin 8, Commercial and Multi-family Building Permits, for complete application requirements
for commercial and multi-family projects.)
The Relocation Investigation Report requires either a Full Plans Submittal for the building, or, if
only minimal or no changes to the building are required, a Limited Plans Submittal.  A Full Plans
Submittal for the foundation and site is required in all circumstances.
What Resource Information Is Available?
King County Information Bulletins, Affidavit of Application Forms, and Owner’s Affidavit Forms
are all available at the King CountyDDES Permit Center at the Renton office location and at
satellite offices.  Forms are also available via the DDES Web site at www.metrokc.gov/ddes, the
DDES Customer Information Line at 206-296-6600 and in the DDES Permit Center in Renton,
Washington.
If customers have a question regarding a building relocation project that was not answered by
this bulletin, or if additional information is needed, please contact the Permit Center of DDES at
206-296-6600.
Bulletin 35
11/14/03
Page 2 of 3
Permits For Relocating a Building
Bulletin 35
Other Bulletins and Telephone Numbers That May Be Helpful
Bulletin 1 
Building and Development Permit Telephone Numbers
Bulletin 6 
Working With Contractors
Bulletin 8 
Commercial/Multi-Family Building Permits
Bulletin 9 
Obtaining a Residential Building Permit
Bulletin 10 
Residential Building On or Near Waterfront
Bulletin 12 
The Residential Building Permit Process
Bulletin 21 
Critical Area Review
Bulletin 29 
Drainage Review
Bulletin 40
Financial Guarantees
These and other DDES bulletins are available via the department Web site at
www.metrokc.gov/ddes.
206-296-6600 
DDES Information
206-296-6797 
DDES Appointment Desk
206-296-6630 
Building Inspection Services
206-296-6635 
24-Hour Inspection Request Line
Be sure to visit our Web site at:
www.metrokc.gov/ddes
King County complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  If
you require an accommodation to attend a meeting (two weeks' notice)
or require this information in Braille, audiocassette, or large print, please
call 206-296-6600 or TTY 206-296-7217.
Bulletin 35
11/14/03
Page 3 of 3
