28 
28 
Physician 
Physician's services, whether furnished in the office, the recipient's home, 
a hospital, a skilled nursing facility, or elsewhere, refer to services provided 
by a physician: 
• 
Within the scope of practice of medicine or osteopathy as defined by 
state law; and 
• 
By or under the personal supervision of an individual licensed under 
state law to practice medicine of osteopathy. 
The policy provisions for physicians can be found in the Alabama Medicaid 
Agency Administrative Code, Chapter 6. 
28.1 
Enrollment 
EDS enrolls physicians and issues provider contracts to applicants who 
meet the licensure and/or certification requirements of the state of 
Alabama, the Code of Federal Regulations, the Alabama Medicaid Agency 
Administrative Code, and the Alabama Medicaid Provider Manual. For the 
purpose of enrollment, a physician is defined as: a physician who is fully 
licensed and possesses a current license to practice medicine. 
EDS also enrolls Physician Assistants (PA), Certified Registered Nurse 
Practitioners (CRNP), Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists (CRNA), 
and Anesthesiology Assistants (AA) who are employed by a Medicaid 
enrolled physician. Physician-employed includes physicians practicing in 
an independent practice or in a group practice relationship.  
Refer to Chapter 38, Anesthesiology, for more information on CRNA and 
AA services. 
Refer to Chapter 2, Becoming a Medicaid Provider, for general enrollment 
instructions and information. Failure to provide accurate and truthful 
information or intentional misrepresentation might result in action ranging 
from denial of application to permanent exclusion. 
Provider Number, Type, and Specialty 
A provider who contracts with Medicaid as a physician is issued a nine-digit 
Alabama Medicaid provider number that enables the provider to submit 
claims and receive reimbursement for physician-related claims. 
NOTE: 
All nine digits are required when filing a claim. 
Physicians are assigned a provider type of 01 (Physician). Physician-
Employed Nurse Practitioners or Physician-Employed Physician Assistants 
are assigned a provider type of 06 (Physician-Employed Practitioners), and 
Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists and Anesthesiology Assistants are 
assigned a provider type of 92 (CRNA). 
 
October 2005 
28-1 
 
Physician  
Valid specialties for physicians and physician-employed practitioners are 
listed below: 
Specialty 
Code 
Allergy/Immunology 
03 
Anesthesiology 
05 
Anesthesiology Assistant 
N7 
Cardiac surgery 
S1 
Cardiovascular disease 
06 
Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist 
C3 
Cochlear implant team 
C9 
Colon and rectal surgery 
S2 
Dermatology 
07 
EENT 
XA 
Emergency medicine 
E1 
Endocrinology 
E2 
EPSDT 
E3 
Family practice 
08 
Gastroenterology 
10 
General practice 
01 
General surgery 
02 
Geriatrics 
38 
Hand surgery 
21 
Hematology 
H2 
Infectious diseases 
55 
Internal medicine 
11 
Mammography 
M7 
Neonatology 
N1 
Nephrology 
39 
Neurological surgery 
14 
Neurology 
13 
Nuclear medicine 
36 
Nutrition 
40 
Obstetrics/Gynecology 
16 
Oncology 
XI 
Ophthalmology 
18 
Oral and maxillofacial surgery 
SE 
Orthopedic 
X6 
Orthopedic surgery  
20 
Otorhinolaryngology 
X9 
Pathology 
22 
Pediatrics 
37 
Physician-Employed Nurse Practitioner 
N3 
Physician-Employed Physician Assistant 
N6 
Plastic, reconstructive, cosmetic surgery 
24 
Primary care provider (not a screening provider 
but can refer patients) 
AE 
Proctology 
28 
Psychiatry 
26 
Pulmonary disease 
29 
Radiology 
30 
Rheumatology 
R4 
Thoracic surgery 
33 
Urology 
34 
Vascular surgery 
S4 
 
28-2 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
Enrollment Policy for Physicians 
Providers (in-state and out-of-state) who meet enrollment requirements are 
eligible to participate in the Alabama Medicaid Program. The PA or CRNP 
must send a copy of the prescriptive authority granted by the licensing 
board in order for the PA or CRNP to be added to the Provider License File 
for the purpose of reimbursing the pharmacist for the prescriptions written 
by the PA or CRNP. This copy must be sent to EDS Provider Enrollment, 
P.O. Box 241685, AL 36124-1685. 
EDS will not enroll physicians having limited licenses unless complete 
information as to the limitations and reasons are submitted in writing to the 
Provider Enrollment Unit for review and consideration for enrollment. 
28.2 
Benefits and Limitations 
This section describes program-specific benefits and limitations. Refer to 
Chapter 3, Verifying Recipient Eligibility, for general benefit information and 
limitations. 
Physicians are expected to render medically necessary services to 
Medicaid patients in the same manner and under the same standards as 
for their private patients, and bill the Alabama Medicaid Agency their usual 
and customary fee. 
A physician enrolled in and providing services through an approved 
residency training program will be assigned a pseudo Medicaid license 
number, but may not bill for services performed as part of the residency 
training program. A pseudo Medicaid license number is required on written 
prescriptions issued to Medicaid recipients. To request a pseudo Medicaid 
license number, please refer to Chapter 2, Becoming a Medicaid provider 
for additional information. 
Written medication prescriptions should have a typed or printed name of 
the prescriber on the prescription, handwriting should be legible, and the 
pseudo license number for a resident should be clearly indicated. 
Pharmacists must have the physician’s license number prior to billing 
for prescriptions.  Pharmacies shall use the correct physician license 
number when submitting a pharmacy claim to Medicaid. 
Supervising physicians may bill for services rendered to Medicaid 
recipients by residents enrolled in and providing services through (as part 
of) an approved residency training program. The following rules shall apply 
to physicians supervising residents as part of an approved residency 
training program: 
a. The supervising physician shall sign and date the admission history 
and physical progress notes written by the resident. 
b. The supervising physician shall review all treatment plans and 
medication orders written by the resident. 
c. The supervising physician shall be available by phone or pager. 
d. The supervising physician shall designate another physician to 
supervise the resident in his/her absence. 
e. The supervising physician shall not delegate a task to the resident 
when regulations specify that the physician perform it personally or 
when such delegation is prohibited by state law or the facility's policy. 
 
October 2005 
28-3 
 
Physician  
Payments from Medicaid funds can be made only to physicians who 
provide the services; therefore, no reimbursement can be made to patients 
who may personally pay for the service rendered. 
Reimbursement may be made to a physician submitting a claim for 
services furnished by another physician in the event there is a reciprocal 
arrangement as long as block 19 on the claim identifies the physician who 
actually furnished the service. Both physicians should be enrolled as 
Medicaid providers. The reciprocal arrangement may not exceed 14 days 
in the case of an informal arrangement or 90 continuous days in the case 
of an arrangement involving per diem or other fee-for-time compensation. 
Providers participating in a reciprocal arrangement should be enrolled with 
the Alabama Medicaid Agency. 
The physician agrees when billing Medicaid for a service that the physician 
will accept as payment in full, the amount paid by Medicaid for that service, 
plus any cost-sharing amount to be paid by the recipient, and that no 
additional charge will be made. Conditional collections from patients, made 
before Medicaid pays, which are to be refunded after Medicaid pays, are 
not permissible. The physician may bill the patient, in addition to the cost-
sharing fee, for services rendered when benefit limitations are exhausted 
for the year or when the service is a Medicaid non-covered benefit. 
However, the provider (or their staff) must advise each patient prior to 
services being rendered when Medicaid payment will not be accepted, and 
the patient will be responsible for the bill. If a provider routinely accepts a 
Medicaid assignment, he or she may not bill Medicaid or the recipient for a 
service he or she did not provide, i.e., missed or canceled appointment. 
A hospital-based physician-employed by and paid by a hospital may not bill 
Medicaid for services performed for which the hospital is reimbursed. A 
hospital-based physician shall bill the Medicaid Program on a CMS-1500, 
Health Insurance Claim Form or assign their billing rights to the hospital, 
which shall bill the Medicaid Program on a CMS-1500 form. A hospital-
based physician who is not employed by and paid by a hospital may bill 
Medicaid using a CMS-1500 claim form. 
A physician enrolled in a residency training program and whose practice is 
limited to the institution in which that resident is placed shall not bill 
Medicaid for services performed therein for which the institution is 
reimbursed through the hospitals' cost reports. For tracking purposes, 
these physicians will be assigned pseudo Medicaid license numbers. 
Hospital-based physicians are reimbursed under the same general system 
as is used in Medicare. Bills for services rendered are submitted as follows: 
• 
All hospital-based physicians, including emergency room physicians, 
radiologists, and pathologists, will bill Medicaid on a CMS-1500 claim 
form, or assign their billing rights to the hospital, which shall bill 
Medicaid on a CMS-1500 claim form. 
• 
Physician services personally rendered for individual patients will be 
paid only on a reasonable charge basis (i.e., claims submitted under 
an individual provider number on a physician claim form). This includes 
services provided by a radiologist and/or pathologist. 
• 
Reasonable charge services are: 1) personally furnished for a patient 
by a physician; 2) ordinarily require performance by a physician and; 3) 
contribute to the diagnosis or treatment of an individual patient. 
28-4 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
 
NOTE: 
If a provider routinely accepts Medicaid assignments, he/she may not bill 
Medicaid or the recipient for a service he/she did not provide, i.e., "no call" 
or “no show”.  
28.2.1 
Physician-Employed Practitioner Services 
Medicaid payment may be made for the professional services of the 
following physician-employed practitioners: 
• 
Physician Assistants (PAs) 
• 
Certified Registered Nurse Practitioners (CRNPs) 
Nurse Practitioner is defined as a Registered Professional Nurse who is 
currently licensed to practice in the state, who meets the applicable State 
of Alabama requirements governing the qualifications of nurse 
practitioners. 
Physician Assistant means a person who meets the applicable State of 
Alabama requirements governing the qualifications for assistants to 
primary care physicians. 
All services requiring additional education and training beyond the scope of 
practice billed by a CRNP/PA must be documented in the approved 
collaborative agreement from the Board of Medical Examiners (BME) and 
the Alabama Board of Nursing (ABN) between the practitioner and 
physician.  The only exception is for those “routine” services within the 
scope of practice approved by the applicable licensing and governing 
boards.  Services billed outside a CRNP/PA scope of practice and/or 
collaborative agreement are subject to post-payment review. 
Medicaid will make payment for services of Physician Assistants (PAs) and 
Certified Registered Nurse Practitioners (CRNPs) who are legally 
authorized to furnish services and who render the services under the 
supervision of an employing physician with payment made to the 
employing physician. Medicaid will not make payment to the PA or CRNP. 
Generally, CRNPs and PAs are reimbursed at 80% of the allowed amount 
for all services except lab and injectables, which should pay at 100%. 
The employing physician must be a Medicaid provider in active status. 
The PA or CRNP must enroll with Medicaid and receive an Alabama 
Medicaid provider number with the employing physician as the payee. 
Covered services furnished by the PA or CRNP must be billed under the 
PA’s or CRNP’s name and Alabama Medicaid provider number. 
The covered services for PAs and CRNPs are limited to injectable drugs, 
laboratory services in which the laboratory is CLIA certified to perform, and 
the CPT codes identified in Appendix O, CRNP & PA Services. 
The office visits performed by the PA or CRNP count against the recipient's 
yearly benefit limitation. 
The PA or CRNP may make physician-required visits to nursing facilities. 
The PA or CRNP may not make physician-required inpatient visits to 
hospitals or other institutional settings to qualify for payment to the 
physician or to satisfy current regulations as physician visits. 
 
October 2005 
28-5 
 
Physician  
The PA or CRNP may provide low complexity or straightforward medical 
decision-making services in the emergency room or as an assistant at 
surgery (identified surgical codes only) for reimbursement by Medicaid. 
See Appendix O for a list of covered services. 
The employing-physician need not be physically present with the PA or 
CRNP when the services are being rendered to the recipient; however, the 
physician must be immediately available to the PA or CRNP for direct 
communication by radio, telephone, or telecommunication. 
The PA’s or CRNP’s employing physician is responsible for the 
professional activities of the PA or CRNP and for assuring that the services 
provided are medically necessary and appropriate for the patient. 
There shall be no independent, unsupervised practice by PAs or CRNPs. 
28.2.2 
Covered Services 
In general, Medicaid covers physician services if the services meet the 
following conditions: 
• 
Considered medically necessary by the attending physician 
• 
Designated by procedure codes in the Physicians' Current Procedural 
Terminology (CPT), HCPCS or designated by special procedure codes 
created by Medicaid for its own use 
This table contains details on selected covered services. 
 
Service 
Coverage and Conditions 
Add-on Code 
Add-on Code definition in the CPT is recognized and allowed for 
payment with the appropriate primary code.  
Administration 
Fee 
Please refer to Appendix H, Medicaid Physician Drug List, section 
H.1 (Policy) for information regarding office visits, chemotherapy, 
and administration fees. 
Please refer to Appendix A, Well Child Check-Up, Section A.6.1 
(Fees) for information regarding the use of designated VFC codes 
for billing immunization administration fee(s). 
Allergy 
Treatments 
Please refer to Appendix H, Medicaid Physician Drug List, section 
H.1.2 (Chemotherapy Injections) for information. 
Anesthesia 
Anesthesia is covered. See Chapter 38, Anesthesiology. 
Artificial Eyes  
Artificial eyes must be prescribed by a physician. 
Breathing or 
Inhalation 
Treatments 
Breathing or inhalation treatments are a covered service.  Any 
medication provided during a breathing treatment (e.g., Albuterol) is 
considered a component of the treatment charge.  
Cardiac 
Catheterization 
Please note that modifier 51 (multiple procedures) should not be 
utilized with cardiac codes 93501-93533 or 93539-93556. 
Cerumen 
Removal 
Code 69210 (which requires skill and use of forceps, suction, or 
cerumen spoon) is a covered service.   
Chemotherapy 
Administration 
Please note code 36823 includes chemotherapy dose 
calculation/administration by injection into the perfusate.  Codes 
96408-96425 should not be utilized with codes 96408-96425.  
CAT scans are covered as medically necessary. 
Computerized 
Axial 
Tomograph 
(CAT) Scans  
Chiropractors  
Chiropractic services are covered only for QMB recipients and for 
services referred directly as a result of an EPSDT screening. 
 
28-6 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
Service 
Coverage and Conditions 
Chromosomal 
Studies  
Medicaid can pay for these studies on prospective mothers in an 
effort to identify conditions that could result in the birth of an 
abnormal child. 
 
Circumcision  
Circumcision of newborns is a covered service. If medically 
necessary, non-newborn circumcision is covered. 
 
Diet Instruction  
Diet instruction performed by a physician is considered part of a 
routine visit. 
Drugs 
Non-injectable drugs must be billed by a pharmacy to be covered. 
Physicians who administer injectable drugs to their patients may 
bill Medicaid for the cost of the drug by using the procedure code 
designated by Medicaid for this purpose. 
Examinations 
Physician visits for examinations are counted as part of each 
recipient’s benefit limit of 14 physician visits per year. Exception: 
Certified Emergencies. 
Annual routine physical examinations are not covered except 
through EPSDT. Refer to Appendix A, EPSDT, for details. 
Medical examinations for such reasons as insurance policy 
qualifications are not covered. 
Physical examinations for establishment of total and permanent 
disability status if considered medically necessary are covered. 
Medicaid requires a physician's visit once every 60 days for 
patients in a nursing facility. Patients in intermediate care facilities 
for the mentally retarded must receive a complete physical 
examination at least annually. 
Eyecare 
Eye examinations by physicians are a Medicaid covered service. 
Physician visits for eyecare disease are counted as part of each 
recipient's benefit limit of 14 physician visits per year. 
Foot Devices 
See Chapter 14, Durable Medical Equipment (DME), for details 
 
Gastric bypass 
Covered with prior authorization 
 
Hearing Aids 
See Chapter 10, Audiology/Hearing Services, for details. 
Hyperbaric 
Oxygen Therapy 
Topically applied oxygen is not hyperbaric and is not covered. 
HBO therapy should not be a replacement for other standard 
successful therapeutic measure. Medical necessity for the use of 
hyperbaric oxygen for more than two months must be prior 
approved (see Chapter 4, Obtaining Prior Authorization). 
Physician attendance should be billed using procedure code 
99183. Prior approval for HBO for diagnoses not listed below or 
for treatments exceeding the limitations listed may be submitted to 
EDS for consideration on an individual recipient basis. Please note 
that no approval will be granted for diagnoses listed in the 
exclusion section. Program reimbursement for HBO therapy is 
limited to that which is administered in a chamber for the 
diagnoses found in Chapter 19 Hospital, under Outpatient 
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBO). 
Please refer to Section 28.2.9 for documentation requirements  
for parental, TPN, IDPN, and IPN nutrition. 
Added: 
Hyperalimentation 
Hyperalimention 
Parental 
  TPN 
  IDPN 
IPN 
 
October 2005 
28-7 
 
Physician  
Immunizations 
The Department of Public Health provides vaccines at no charge 
to Medicaid physicians enrolled in the Vaccines For Children 
(VFC) Program. Medicaid reimburses administration fees for 
vaccines provided free of charge through the Vaccines For 
Children (VFC) Program. Medicaid tracks usage of the vaccine 
through billing of the administration fee using the appropriate CPT-
4 codes. Refer to Appendix A, EPSDT, for more information. 
The single antigen vaccines may be billed only when medically 
justified and prior authorized. These vaccines are listed below: 
• 
Diphtheria 
• 
Measles 
• 
Mumps 
• 
Rubella  
 
Payment for immunizations against communicable diseases for 
adults will be made if the physician normally charges his patients 
for this service. 
Infant 
Resuscitation 
Newborn resuscitation (procedure code 99440) is a covered 
service when the baby's condition is life threatening and 
immediate resuscitation is necessary to restore and maintain life 
functions. Intubation, endotracheal, emergency procedure 
(procedure code 31500) cannot be billed in conjunction with 
newborn resuscitation. 
Mammography 
Diagnostic 
Diagnostic mammography is furnished to a man/woman with signs 
or symptoms of breast disease, or a personal history of breast 
cancer, or a personal history of biopsy-proven benign breast 
disease, and includes a physician’s interpretation of the results of 
the procedure. Services are not limited. 
Mammography 
Screening 
Furnished to a woman without signs or symptoms of breast 
disease, for the purpose of early detection of breast cancer, and 
includes a physician’s interpretation of the results of the 
procedures. Services are limited to one screening mammography 
every 12 months for women ages 50 through 64. 
Medical 
Materials and 
Supplies 
Costs for medical materials and supplies normally utilized during 
office visits or surgical procedures are to be considered part of the 
total fee for procedures performed by the physician and therefore 
are not generally a separately billable service. 
Newborn Claims 
Five kinds of newborn care performed by physicians in the days 
after the child's birth when the mother is still in the hospital may be 
filed under the mother's name and number or the baby's name 
and number: 
1. Routine newborn care (99431, 99433, and discharge codes 
99238 or 99239) 
2. Circumcision (54150 or 54160) 
3. Newborn resuscitation (99440) 
4. Standby services following a caesarian section or a high-risk 
vaginal delivery. (99360) 
5. Attendance at delivery (when requested by delivering 
physician) and initial stabilization of newborn (99436) 
Standby services (procedure code 99360) are covered only when 
the pediatrician, family practitioner, neonatologist, general 
practitioner, or non-delivering OB/GYN is on standby in the 
operating or delivery room during a caesarian section or a high-
risk vaginal delivery. Attendance of the standby physician in the 
hospital operating or delivery room must be documented in the 
operating or delivery report. 
Use CPT codes when filing claims for these five kinds of care. 
If these services are billed under the mother's name and number 
and the infant(s) are twins, indicate Twin A or Twin B in Block 19 
of the claim form. 
Any care other than routine newborn care for a well baby, before 
and after the mother leaves the hospital, must be billed under the 
child's name and number. 
28-8 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
Newborn 
Hearing 
Screening 
Inpatient newborn hearing screenings are considered an integral 
part of inpatient hospital services. Outpatient facility services for 
newborn hearing screenings are considered non-covered. 
 
Limited hearing screen codes 92586 and 92587 (CPT 2002) may 
be billed in an outpatient setting provided: 1) an infant was 
discharged prior to receiving the inpatient hearing screen, or 2) an 
infant was born outside a hospital or birthing center. These codes 
are reimbursable for audiologists, pediatricians, otolaryngologists, 
and EENT. 
 
Comprehensive hearing screen codes 92585/92588 may be billed 
for: 1) infants who fail the newborn hearing screening prior to 
discharge from the hospital, or 2) infants/children fail a hearing 
screening at any time following discharge. Comprehensive hearing 
screenings should be performed on infants by three months of age 
if they failed the newborn hearing screening prior to discharge. 
Code 92585 is reimbursable for otolaryngologists, audiologists, 
pediatricians, and EENT. Code 92588 is reimbursable for 
otolaryngologists, audiologists, pediatricians, EENT, and 
neurologists. 
Obstetrical 
Services 
 Refer to Section 28.2.10 
Oxygen and 
Compressed 
Gas 
A physician's fee for administering oxygen or other compressed 
gas is a covered service under the Medicaid program. Oxygen 
therapy is a covered service based on medical necessity and 
requires prior authorization. Please refer to Chapter 14, DME, for 
more information. 
Podiatrist 
Service 
Covered for QMB or EPSDT referred services only. See Chapter 
29, Podiatrist, for more details. 
Post Surgical 
Visits 
Post-surgical hospital or office visits for conditions directly related 
to major surgical procedures are covered by the surgical fee. Post-
surgical visits cannot be billed separately the day of, or up to 62 
days after surgery. 
Prosthetic 
Devices 
Internal prosthetic devices (e.g., Smith Peterson Nail or 
pacemaker) are a covered benefit. 
 
Psychiatric 
Services 
Physician visits for psychiatric services are counted as part of 
each recipient's benefit limit of 14 physician visits per year. 
Psychiatric evaluation or testing are covered services under the 
Physicians' Program if services are rendered by a physician in 
person and are medically necessary. Psychiatric evaluations are 
limited to one per calendar year, per provider, per recipient. 
Psychotherapy visits are included in the office visit limit of 12 visits 
per calendar year. Office visits are not covered when billed in 
conjunction with psychotherapy codes. 
Psychiatric services under the Physicians' Program are confined 
to use with psychiatric diagnosis (290-319) and must be 
performed by a physician. 
Hospital visits are not covered when billed in conjunction with 
psychiatric therapy on the same day. 
For services rendered by psychologist, see Chapter 34 for details. 
Psychiatric day care is not a covered benefit under the Physicians' 
Program. 
Radiation 
Treatment 
Management 
Radiation treatment management services do not need to be 
furnished on consecutive days. Up to two units may be billed on 
the same date of service as long as there has been a separate 
break in therapy sessions. 
Second 
Opinions 
Physician visits for second opinions are counted as part of each 
recipient's benefit limit of 14 physician visits per year. 
Optional Surgery: Second opinions (regarding non-emergency 
surgery) are highly recommended in the Medicaid program when 
the recipients request them.  
Diagnostic Services: Payment may be made for covered 
diagnostic services deemed necessary by the second physician. 
 
October 2005 
28-9 
 
Physician  
Self-inflicted 
injuries 
Self-inflicted injuries are covered. 
Surgery 
Cosmetic surgery is covered only when prior approved for medical 
necessity. Examples of medical necessity include prompt repair of 
accidental injuries or improvement of the functioning of a 
malformed body member. 
Elective surgery is covered when medically necessary. 
Multiple surgeries are governed by the following rules: 
When multiple or bilateral surgical procedures that add significant 
time or complexity are performed at the same operative session,  
Medicaid pays for the procedure with the highest allowed amount 
and half of the allowed amount for each subsequent procedure. 
This also applies to laser surgical procedures. Additional 
payments will not be made for procedures considered to be 
mutually exclusive or incidental. When multiple and/or bilateral 
procedures are billed in conjunction with one another that meet 
the definition of bundled, subset, CPT’s “Format of Terminology”, 
and/or comprehensive/component (bundled) codes, then, the 
procedure with the highest allowed amount will be paid while the 
lesser procedure will not be considered for payment as the 
procedure is considered an integral part of the covered service.. 
Any dressing/compression wrap performed in conjunction with 
wound debridement is considered part of the debridement 
services and is not separately covered/billable. 
Certain procedures are commonly carried out as integral parts of 
a total service and as such do not warrant a separate charge. 
When incidental procedures (e.g., excision of a previous scar or 
puncture of an ovarian cyst) are performed during the same 
operative session, Medicaid reimburses for the major procedure 
only. 
Laparotomy is covered when it is the only surgical procedure 
performed during the operative session or when performed with an 
unrelated or incidental surgical procedure. Surgeons performing 
laparoscopic procedures on recipients where a laparoscopic 
procedure code (PC) has not been established should bill the 
most descriptive PC with modifier 22 (unusual procedural 
services) until the new PC is established. 
CPT defined Add-on codes are considered for coverage when 
billed with the appropriate primary procedure code. 
Effective January 1, 2005, code 69990 (operating microscope) 
may be paid separately only when submitted with the following 
CPT codes: 61304-61546, 61550-61711, 62010-62100, 63081-
63308, 63704-63710, 64831, 64834-64836, 64840-64858, 64861-
64870, 64885-64898, 64905-64907. 
Certain relatively small surgical procedure codes formally 
designated in the CPT with an (*) may be billed in addition to an 
office visit.  Additionally, these codes do not carry the global 
surgical package concept of inclusion of post-operative care within 
62 days of the surgery.  In the 2004 CPT guidelines the (*) 
designation has been removed.  For reference, these codes are 
listed the Procedure Codes section in Chapter 28 of the Billing 
Manual. 
It is necessary to append the appropriate anatomical modifiers to 
surgical codes to differentiate between multiple surgeries and 
sites. 
Appropriate use of CPT and HCPCs modifiers is required to 
differentiate between sites and procedures.  Please refer to 
Section 28.5.3 Procedure Codes and Modifiers 
NOTE: Surgeons are responsible for submitting hard copy 
hysterectomy and tubal ligation consent forms to EDS at PO Box 
244032, Montgomery, AL 36124 Attn: Desiree Nelson. 
28-10 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
Surgery, Breast 
Reconstruction 
Breast reconstruction surgery is reimbursable following a 
medically necessary mastectomy when performed for the removal 
of cancer. All reconstructive procedures require prior 
authorization. The term "reconstruction" shall include 
augmentation mammoplasty, reduction mammoplasty, and 
mastoplexy. Breast reconstruction surgeries are governed by the 
following rules: 
• 
The reconstruction follows a medically necessary mastectomy 
for the removal of cancer 
• 
The recipient is eligible for Medicaid on the date of 
reconstruction surgery 
• 
The recipient elects reconstruction within two years of the 
mastectomy surgery 
• 
The diagnosis codes used are appropriate 
• 
The surgery is performed in the manner chosen by the patient 
and the physician in accordance with guidelines consistent 
with Medicare and other third party payers 
• 
For more information regarding prior authorization, please 
refer to Chapter 4 Obtaining Prior Authorization. For more 
information related to breast prosthesis, please refer to 
Chapter 14 Durable Medical Equipment. 
Therapy 
Physician visits for therapy are counted as part of each recipient's 
benefit limit of 14 physician visits per year. See Rule No. 560-X-
6.14 for details about this benefit limit in the Alabama Medicaid 
Agency Administrative Code, Chapter 6. 
Physical Therapy is not covered when provided in a physician's 
office. Physical therapy is covered only when prescribed by a 
physician and provided in a hospital setting. Refer to Chapter 19, 
Hospital, for more information. 
Group Therapy is a covered service when a psychiatric diagnosis 
is present and the therapy is prescribed, performed, and billed by 
the physician personally. Group Therapy is not covered when 
performed by a caseworker, social services worker, mental health 
worker, or any counseling professional other than physician. 
Group Therapy is included in the physician visit limit of 14 visits 
per year. 
Speech Therapy for a speech related diagnosis, such as stroke 
(CVA) or partial laryngectomy, is a covered benefit when 
prescribed by and performed by a physician in his office. Speech 
therapy performed in an inpatient or outpatient hospital setting or 
in a nursing facility is a covered benefit, but is considered covered 
as part of the reimbursement made to the facility and should not 
be billed by the physician. 
Family Therapy is a covered service when a psychiatric diagnosis 
is present and the physician providing the service supplies 
documentation that justifies the medical necessity of the therapy 
for each family member. Family therapy is not covered unless the 
patient is present. Family Therapy is not covered when performed 
by a caseworker, social service worker, mental health worker, or 
any counseling professional other than a physician. Family 
Therapy is included in the physician visit limit of 14 visits per year. 
Transplants 
See Chapter 19, Hospitals, for transplant coverage. 
Ventilation Study
Ventilation study is covered if done in physician's office by the 
physician or under the physician's direct supervision. 
Documentation in the medical record must contain all of the 
following: 
• 
Graphic record 
• 
Total and timed vital capacity 
• 
Maximum breathing capacity 
Always indicate if the studies were performed with or without a 
bronchodilator. 
 
October 2005 
28-11 
 
Physician  
Well Baby 
Coverage 
Well baby coverage is covered only on the initial visit, which must 
be provided within eight weeks of the birth. When the well-baby 
checkup is done, the physician should bill procedure code 99432. 
Only one well-baby checkup can be paid per lifetime, per recipient. 
Refer to Appendix A, EPSDT, for information on additional 
preventive services. 
 
NOTE: 
For newborn hospital discharge services performed on a subsequent 
admission date, use code 99238. Please use code 99435 when filing 
claims for newborns assessed and discharged from the hospital or 
birthing room on the same date.  
28.2.3 
Non-covered Services 
Service 
Coverage and Conditions 
Acupuncture 
Acupuncture is not covered. 
After Office 
Hours 
The following services are not covered: After office hours, services 
provided in a location other than the physician’s office, and office 
services provided on an emergency basis. 
Autopsies  
Autopsies are not covered. 
Biofeedback  
Biofeedback is not covered. 
Blood Tests  
Blood tests are not covered for marriage licenses. 
Casting and 
Supplies 
Some surgical codes are considered an inclusive package of 
professional services and/or supplies and are not considered 
separately allowable or reimbursable as the fracture repair or 
surgical codes is inclusive of these services.  An example of this 
would be a surgical code for a fracture repair which is inclusive of 
any casting and strapping services or supplies. 
Cerumen 
Removal 
When a simple instrument is used, such as a curette, or a solvent or 
lavage is used, and the cerumen comes out easily, it is considered a 
component of an evaluation and management charge. 
Chiropractors  
Chiropractic services are not covered, except for QMB recipients and 
for services referred directly as a result of an EPSDT screening. 
Chromosomal 
Studies  
Chromosomal studies (amniocentesis) on unborn children being 
considered for adoption are not covered. 
Medicaid can pay for these studies on prospective mothers in an 
effort to identify conditions that could result in the birth of an 
abnormal child. 
Dressing and 
Compression 
Wrap 
Any dressing/compression wrap performed in conjunction with 
wound debridement is considered part of the debridement services 
and is not separately covered/billable. 
Experimental treatment or surgery is not covered. 
Experimental 
Treatment or 
Surgery 
Filing Fees 
Filing Fees are not covered. 
Hypnosis 
Hypnosis is not covered. 
Laetrile 
Therapy 
Laetrile therapy is not covered. 
Mutually 
Exclusive 
Procedures 
Mutually exclusive procedures are those codes that cannot 
reasonably be done in the same session and are considered not 
separately allowable or reimbursable.  For example, a vaginal and 
abdominal hysterectomy on the same date of service. 
Oxygen and 
Compressed 
Gas 
A physician's fee for administering oxygen or other compressed gas 
is a covered service under the Medicaid program; the cost of the 
oxygen or gas is not covered. 
28-12 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
Service 
Coverage and Conditions 
When multiple and/or bilateral procedures are billed in conjunction 
with one another and meet the CPTs definition of “Format of 
Terminology” (bundled or subset) and/or comprehensive/component 
(bundled) codes, then the procedure with the highest amount will be 
paid while the procedure with the lesser amount will not be 
considered for payment as the procedure is considered an integral 
part of the covered service.  Please refer to Section 28.5.3 
Procedure Codes and Modifiers. 
 
Incidental surgical procedures are defined as those codes that are 
commonly carried out as integral parts of a total service and as such 
do not warrant a separate charge.  An example of this would be lysis 
of adhesions during the same session as an abdominal surgery. 
Surgery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Post Surgical 
Visits 
Post-surgical hospital or office visits for conditions directly related to 
major surgical procedures are covered by the surgical fee. Post-
surgical visits cannot be billed separately one day prior to surgery or 
up to 62 days after surgery. 
Visits by Assistant Surgeon or Surgeons are not covered. 
Preventive 
Medicine 
Medicaid does not cover preventive medicine other than those 
specified elsewhere, including but not limited to, EPSDT screening. 
Syntocin 
Syntocin is not covered. 
Telephone 
Consultations 
Telephone consultations are not covered. 
Therapy 
Occupational and Recreational Therapies are not covered. 
 
28.2.4 
Limitations on Services 
Within each calendar year each recipient is limited to no more than a total 
of 14 physician visits in offices, hospital outpatient settings, nursing 
facilities, rural health clinics or Federally Qualified Health Centers. Visits 
not counted under this benefit limit will include, but not be limited to, visits 
for: EPSDT, prenatal care, postnatal care, and family planning. Physicians 
services provided in a hospital outpatient setting that have been certified as 
an emergency do not count against the physician benefit limit of 14 per 
calendar year. If a patient receives ancillary services in a doctor's office, by 
the physician or under his/her direct supervision, and the doctor submits a 
claim only for the ancillary services but not for the office visit, then the 
services provided will not be counted as a visit. 
For further information regarding outpatient maintenance dialysis and 
ESRD, refer to Chapter 35, Renal Dialysis Facility. 
A new patient office visit codes shall not be paid to the same physician or 
same group practice for a recipient more than once in a three-year period. 
28.2.5 
Physician Services to Hospital Inpatients 
In addition to the 14 physician visits, Medicaid covers up to 16 inpatient 
dates of service per physician, per recipient, per calendar year. For 
purposes of this limitation, each specialty within a group or partnership is 
considered a single provider. 
When filing claims for recipients enrolled in the Patient 1st Program, please 
refer to Chapter 39, Patient 1st, to determine whether your services require 
a referral from the Primary Medical Provider (PMP). 
 
October 2005 
28-13 
 
Physician  
Physician hospital visits are limited to one visit per day, per recipient, per 
provider. 
Physician(s) may bill for inpatient professional interpretation(s), when that 
interpretation serves as the official and final report documented in the 
patient’s medical record. Professional interpretation may be billed in 
addition to a hospital visit if the rounding physician also is responsible for 
the documentation of the final report for the procedure in the patient’s 
medical record. Professional interpretation may not be billed in addition to 
hospital visits if the provider reviews results in the medical record or 
unofficially interprets medical, laboratory, or radiology tests. Review and 
interpretation of such tests and results are included in the evaluation and 
management of the inpatient. Medicaid will cover either one hospital visit or 
professional interpretation(s) up to the allowed benefit limit for most 
services. Professional interpretations are allowed in the inpatient setting for 
the following services: 
Echocardiography (i.e., M-mode, transthoracic, complete and follow up) 
Echocardiography (i.e., 2D, transesophageal) 
Echocardiography (i.e., Doppler pulsed or continuous wave with spectral 
display, complete and follow up) 
Cardiac Catheterizations 
Comprehensive electrophysiologic evaluations and follow up testing 
Programmed stimulation and pacing 
Intra-operative epicardial and endocardial pacing and mapping 
Intracardiac catheter ablations; intracardiac echocardiography 
Evaluation of cardiovascular function 
Plethysmography, total body and tracing 
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring 
Cerebrovascular arterial studies, extremity arterial studies, venous studies, 
and visceral and penile studies 
Circardian respiratory pattern recording (i.e., pediatric pneumogram), infant 
Needle electromyography 
Ischemic limb exercise test 
Assessment of aphasia 
Developmental testing 
Neurobehavioral status exam and neuropsychological testing battery 
28-14 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
Professional interpretations for lab and x-ray (CPT code 70000 through 
80000 services) in the inpatient setting can only be billed by pathologists 
and radiologists. The only exception is for professional interpretations by 
cardiologists for catheterization or arterial studies and for select laboratory 
procedures by oncologists and hematologists. Professional 
interpretations/components done by other physicians for services in this 
procedure code range are included in the hospital visit if one is done. If no 
hospital visit is made, professional interpretation by physicians other than 
radiologists, pathologists, oncologists, hematologists, and cardiologists 
should not be billed as these services are covered only for the above-
mentioned specialties. 
A physician hospital visit and hospital discharge shall not be paid to the 
same physician on the same day. If both are billed, only the discharge shall 
be paid. 
Professional interpretations performed for an inpatient are counted by 
dates of service rather than the number of interpretation performed. 
An office visit and an inpatient visit shall not be paid to the same physician 
on the same day. If both are billed, then the first Procedure Code billed will 
be paid.  
Physician consults are limited to one per day per recipient. 
28.2.6 
Critical Care 
When caring for a critically ill patient, for whom the constant attention of the 
physician is required, the appropriate critical care procedure code (99291 
and 99292) must be billed. Critical care guidelines are defined in the 
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) and Provider Manual. Critical care 
is considered a daily global inclusive of all services directly related to 
critical care. These codes can only be billed for a recipient age 25 months 
and older. 
Coverage of critical care may total no more than four hours per day. 
The actual time period spent in attendance at the patient's bedside or 
performing duties specifically related to that patient, irrespective of breaks 
in attendance, must be documented in the patient's medical record. 
RESTRICTIONS: 
No individual procedures related to critical care may be billed in addition to 
procedure codes 99291 and 99292, except: 
• 
An EPSDT screening may be billed in lieu of the initial hospital 
care (P/C 99221, 99222, or 99223). If screening is billed, the initial 
hospital care cannot be billed.  
• 
Procedure code 99082 (transportation or escort of patient) may 
also be billed with critical care (99291 and/or 99292). Only the 
attending physician may bill this service and critical care. 
Residents or nurses who escort a patient may not bill either 
service. 
 
October 2005 
28-15 
 
Physician  
LIMITATIONS: 
• 
Procedure codes 99291 and 99292 may be billed by the 
physician providing the care of the critically ill or injured patient 
in place of service 41, Ambulance, if care is personally 
rendered by the physician providing the care of the critically ill 
or injured patient. 
28.2.7 
Pediatric and Neonatal Critical Care 
CPT Code 
Description 
Criteria 
Not valid for ages 28 
days or less, can be 
billed by any physician 
provider type 
99293 
Initial Inpatient Pediatric 
Critical Care, per day, for the 
evaluation and management of 
a critically ill infant or young 
child, 29 days through 24 
months of age 
Not valid for ages 28 days 
or less, can be billed by 
any physician provider 
type 
99294 
Subsequent Inpatient Pediatric 
Critical Care per day, for the 
evaluation and management of 
a critically ill infant or young 
child, 29 days through 24 
months of age. 
Not valid for ages 29 days 
or older, can be billed by 
any physician provider 
type 
99295 
Initial Inpatient Neonatal 
Critical Care, per day for the 
evaluation and management of 
a critically ill neonate, 28 days 
of age or less 
 
 
Not valid for ages 29 days 
or older, can be billed by 
any physician provider 
type 
99296 
Subsequent Inpatient Neonatal 
Critical Care, per day for the 
evaluation and management of 
a critically ill neonate, 28 days 
of age or less 
The pediatric and neonatal critical care codes (99293-99296) include 
management, monitoring and treatment of the patient, including 
respiratory, pharmacological control of the circulatory system, enteral and 
parenteral nutrition, metabolic and hematologic maintenance, parent/family 
counseling, case management services and personal direct supervision of 
the health care team in the performance of their daily activities. 
Routinely these codes may include any of the following services, therefore 
these services should not be billed separately from the critical care codes 
99293-99296: umbilical venous or umbilical arterial catheters, central or 
peripheral vessel catheterization, other arterial catheters, oral or nasal 
gastric tube placement, endotracheal intubation, lumbar puncture, 
suprapubic bladder aspiration, bladder catheterization, initiation and 
management of mechanical ventilation or CPAP, surfactant administration, 
intravascular fluid administration, transfusion of blood components 
(excluding exchange transfusions), vascular puncture, invasive or non-
invasive electronic monitoring of vital signs, beside pulmonary function 
testing, and/or monitoring or interpretation of blood gases or oxygen 
saturation. 
28-16 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
The following criteria should be used as guidelines for the correct reporting 
of neonatal and pediatric critical care codes for the critically ill 
neonate/infant. Only one criterion is required to be classified as critically ill. 
• 
Respiratory support by ventilator or CPAP 
• 
Nitric oxide or ECMO 
• 
Prostaglandin, Indotropin of Chronotropic or Insulin infusions 
• 
NPO  with IV fluids 
• 
Acute Dialysis (renal or peritoneal) 
• 
Weight less than 1,250 grams 
• 
Acute respiratory distress in a pediatric admission requiring oxygen 
therapy with at least daily adjustment and FIO2>35% oxygen by 
oxyhood. 
RESTRICTIONS: 
No individual procedures related to critical care may be billed in addition to 
procedure codes 99293-99296 except: 
• 
Chest tube placement 
• 
Pericardiocentesis or thoacentesis 
• 
Intracranial taps 
• 
Initial hospital care history and physical or EPSDT screen may be 
billed in conjunction with 99295.  Both may not be billed.  NOTE:  
One EPSDT screen for the hospitalization will encompass all 
diagnoses identified during the hospital stay for referral purposes. 
• 
Standby (99360), resuscitation (99440), or attendance at delivery 
(99436) may be billed in addition to critical care.  Only one of these 
codes may be billed in addition to neonatal intensive care critical 
care codes. 
LIMITATIONS: 
• 
Code 99293 (initial inpatient pediatric critical care) is reported for 
the initial evaluation and management on the first day for infants 
29 days through 24 months of age. 
• 
Code 99294 (subsequent inpatient pediatric critical care) is 
reported for subsequent days (per day) for infants 29 days 
through 24 months of age. 
• 
Code 99295 (initial inpatient neonatal critical care) is reported for 
subsequent days (per day) for neonates, 28 days of age or less. 
 
October 2005 
28-17 
 
Physician  
• 
Code 99296 (subsequent inpatient neonatal critical care) is 
reported for subsequent days (per day) for neonates, 28 days of 
age or less. 
• 
Pediatric, neonatal critical care codes and intensive (non-critical) 
low birth weight service codes are reported once per day per 
recipient. 
• 
Subsequent Hospital Care codes (99231-99233) cannot be billed 
on the same date of service as neonatal critical care codes 
(99293-99296) 
• 
Only one unit of critical care can be billed per child per day in the 
same facility. Medicaid pays the first claim received and denies 
subsequent claims (first in, first out policy). 
• 
Critical care is considered to be an evaluation and management 
service.  Although usually furnished in a critical or intensive care 
unit, critical care may be provided in any inpatient health care 
setting.  Services provided which do not meet critical care criteria, 
should be billed under the appropriate hospital care codes. If a 
recipient is readmitted to the NICU/ICU, the provider must be the 
primary physician in order for NICU critical care codes to be billed 
again. 
• 
Once the patient is no longer considered by the attending 
physician to be critical, the Subsequent Hospital Care codes 
(99231-99233) should be billed. Only one unit can be billed per 
day per physician regardless of specialty. Medicaid pays the first 
claim received and denies subsequent claims (first in, first out 
policy). 
• 
Transfers to the pediatric unit from the NICU cannot be billed using 
critical care codes. Subsequent hospital care would be billed in 
these instances. 
• 
Global payments encompass all care and procedures that are 
included in the rate. Providers may not perform an EPSDT screen 
and refer to a partner or other physician to do procedures. All 
procedures that are included in the daily critical care rate, 
regardless of who performed them, are included in the global 
critical care code. 
• 
Consultant care rendered to children for which the provider is not 
the primary attending physician must be billed using consultation 
codes. Appropriate procedures may be billed in addition to 
consultations. If, after the consultation the provider assumes total 
responsibility for care, critical care may be billed using the 
appropriate critical care codes as defined above. The medical 
record must clearly indicate that the provider is assuming total 
responsibility for care of the patient and is the primary attending 
physician for the patient. 
28-18 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
28.2.8 
Intensive (Non-Critical) Low Birth Weight 
Services 
CPT Code 
Description 
Criteria 
May only be billed by a 
neonatologist 
99298 
Subsequent intensive care, per day, for the 
evaluation and management of the 
recovering very low birth 
May only be billed by a 
neonatologist 
99299 
Subsequent intensive care, per day, for the 
evaluation and management of the 
recovering very low birth weight infant 
(present body weight of 1500-2500 grams) 
These codes are used to report care subsequent to the day of admission 
provided by a neonatologist directing the continuing intensive care of the 
very low birthweight infant who no longer meets the definition of being 
critically ill.  Low birthweight services are reported for neonates less than 
2500 grams who do not meet the definition of critical care but continue to 
require intensive observation and frequent services and intervention only 
available in an intensive care setting. Services provided to these infants 
exceed those available in less intensive hospital areas of medical floors.  
These infants require intensive cardiac and respiratory monitoring, 
continuous and/or frequent vital signs monitoring, heat maintenance, 
enteral and/or parenteral nutritional adjustments, laboratory and oxygen 
monitoring and constant observation by the health care team under direct 
supervision. 
RESTRICTIONS: 
No individual procedures related to critical care may be billed in addition to 
procedure codes 99298-99299 except: 
• 
Chest tube placement 
• 
Pericardiocentesis or thoracentesis 
• 
Intracranial taps 
LIMITATIONS: 
• 
Once the patient is no longer considered by the attending 
physician to be critical, the Subsequent Hospital Care codes 
(99231-99233) should be billed. Only one unit can be billed per 
day per physician regardless of specialty. Medicaid pays the first 
claim received and denies subsequent claims (first in, first out 
policy). 
• 
Global payments encompass all care and procedures that are 
included in the rate. Providers may not perform an EPSDT screen 
and refer to a partner or other physician to do procedures. All 
procedures that are included in the daily critical care rate, 
regardless of who performed them, are included in the global 
critical care code. 
 
October 2005 
28-19 
 
Physician  
• 
Consultant care rendered to children for which the provider is not 
the primary attending physician must be billed using consultation 
codes. Appropriate procedures may be billed in addition to 
consultations. If, after the consultation the provider assumes total 
responsibility for care, critical care may be billed using the 
appropriate critical care codes as per the setting. The medical 
record must clearly indicate that the provider is assuming total 
responsibility for care of the patient and is the primary attending 
physician for the patient. 
• 
Pediatric, neonatal critical care codes and intensive (non-critical) 
low birth weight services codes are only reported once per day per 
recipient. 
28.2.9 
End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) 
Physician services rendered to each outpatient maintenance dialysis 
patient provided during a full month shall be billed on a monthly capitation 
basis using the appropriate procedure code by age as outlined in the CPT. 
Monthly maintenance dialysis payment (i.e., uninterrupted maintenance 
dialysis) is comprehensive and covers most of a physician’s services 
whether a patient dialyzes at home or in an approved ESRD outpatient 
facility.  Dialysis procedures are allowed in addition to the monthly 
maintenance dialysis payment. In general, the Agency follows Medicare 
guidelines related to monthly capitation payments for physicians.   
 
Physician services included in the monthly capitation payment for ESRD 
related services include, but are not limited to: 
• 
Assessment and determination of the need for outpatient chronic 
dialysis therapy 
• 
Assessment and determination of the type of dialysis access and 
dialyzing cycle,  
• 
Management of the dialysis visits including outpatient visits for 
evaluation and management, management during the dialysis, and 
telephone calls. 
• 
Assessment and determination if a recipient meets preliminary criteria 
as a renal transplant candidate including discussions with family 
members 
• 
Assessment for a specified diet and nutritional supplementation for the 
control of chronic renal failure, including specifying quantity of total 
protein, sodium, potassium, amount of fluids, types of anemia and 
appropriate treatments, type of arthropathy or neuropathy and 
appropriate treatment or referral, estimated ideal dry weight, etc. 
Assessment for diabetic patient’s diet and caloric intake is included 
also. 
• 
Prescribing the parameters of intradialytic management including 
anticoagulant, dialysis blood flow rates and temperature, duration and 
frequency of treatments, etc. 
 
The monthly capitation payment is limited to once per month, per recipient, 
per provider. 
 
28-20 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
The following services are not covered by the monthly capitation payment 
(MCP) for the attending dialysis physicians and are reimbursed in 
accordance with usual and customary charge rules: 
• 
 Declotting of shunts 
• 
 Covered physician services furnished to hospital inpatients by a 
physician who elects not to receive the MCP for these service, For 
example, an attending physician who provides evaluation and 
management (E & M) services for a renal patient in an inpatient setting 
may bill appropriate CPT hemodialysis procedures in lieu of certain 
other E & M services for ipatient visits. 
•  
Nonrenal related physician services furnished by the physician 
providing renal care or by another physician. (These services may not 
be incidental to services furnished during a dialysis session or office 
visit necessitated by the renal condition.) For example, physician 
services rendered to hospitalized inpatient recipients who require 
dialysis but are not receiving dialysis on that day may use the 
appropriate procedure code as described in the CPT. 
 
Physician services are allowed for outpatient maintenance dialysis patients 
not performed as prescribed during a full month or interruptedly. An 
example of interrupted monthly outpatient dialysis maintenance is 
preceding and/or following the period of hospitalization. 
 
The CPT codes described by age for physicians rendering outpatient 
dialysis services that are interrupted during a full month should be billed on 
a per day basis. These codes should be billed for the days of the month in 
which the outpatient ESRD related services were performed.   
 
Single or repeated physician assessments are allowed for hemodialysis or 
dialysis procedures other than hemodialysis. These services are 
comprehensive and include assessment and management related to the 
patient’s renal dialysis. Please utilize the most descriptive and appropriate 
CPT dialysis procedure when billing for single or repeated physician 
evaluation(s). 
 
Dialysis training is a covered service when billed by an approved ESRD 
facility. 
Refer to Chapter 35, Renal Dialysis Facility, for further details. 
 
Parenteral Nutrition 
Added: 
Parenteral 
Nutrition 
The Alabama Medicaid Agency may reimburse for total parenteral 
nutritional (TPN) solutions through the pharmacy program if the recipient 
meets certain requirements as listed below.  TPN solutions include those 
used for hyperalimentation, intradialytic parenteral nutrition (IDPN), and 
intraperitoneal nutrition (IPN).  Requirements must be met and clearly 
documented in the medical record for coverage of all TPN.  All services 
rendered are subject to post payment review.   
 
 
October 2005 
28-21 
 
Physician  
Statement of Medical Necessity 
The ordering physician will be responsible for writing a statement of 
medical necessity.  This statement shall certify that the patient cannot be 
maintained on oral or enteral feedings and that due to severe pathology of 
the alimentary tract either hyperalimentation or IDPN/IPN must be given for 
100% of nutritional needs.  The original signed statement of medical 
necessity must be kept in the patient’s medical record.  This certification 
statement must be written or stamped on the prescription or reproduced on 
a form accompanying the prescription.  The statement must be signed and 
dated by the certifying physician at the time of each order.   
Hyperalimentation 
Added: Statement of 
Medical Necessity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Added: 
Hyperalimentation 
section 
Medicaid covers hyperalimentation for recipients who meet certain 
requirements of medical necessity and documentation in the medical 
record is sufficient based on the following: 
 
• Documentation in the medical record must validate the patient suffers 
from a permanently impaired gastrointestinal tract and that there is 
insufficient absorption of nutrients to maintain adequate strength and 
weight.  The following are considered conditions which could cause 
insufficient absorption:  
 
1. Crohn’s disease 
2. Obstruction secondary to stricture or neoplasm of the esophagus 
or stomach  
3. Loss of ability to swallow due to central nervous system disorder, 
where the risk of aspiration is great 
4. Short bowel syndrome secondary to massive small bowel 
resection 
5. Malabsorption due to enterocolic, enterovesical or 
enterocutaneous fistulas (TPN temporary until the repair of the fistula) 
6. Motility disorder (pseudo-obstruction) 
7. Prolonged paralytic ileus following a major surgical procedure or 
multiple injuries 
8. Newborn infants with catastrophic gastrointestinal anomalies such 
as tracheoesophageal fistulas, gastroschisis, omphalocele or massive 
intestinal atresia 
9. Infants and young children who fail to thrive due to systemic 
disease or secondary to insufficiency associated with short bowel 
syndrome, malabsorption or chronic idiopathic diarrhea. 
 
• 
Medical record documentation must include supporting evidence that 
the patient cannot be maintained on oral or enteral feedings and that 
due to severe pathology of the alimentary tract, hyperalimentation must 
be given in order to meet 100% of the patient’s nutritional needs. 
28-22 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
• 
Physical signs, symptoms and test results indicating severe pathology 
of the alimentary tract must be clearly documented in the medical 
record.  This would include BUN, serum albumin, and phosphorus.  
Medical records must document inability to maintain weight during a 
trial of at least four weeks of enteral feeding. 
Intradialytic Parenteral Nutrition (IDPN) and Intraperitoneal Nutrition 
(IPN) 
Added: Physical 
signs, 
symptoms…of 
enteral feeding 
 
Added: 
Intradialytic 
Parenteral 
Nutrition (IDPN) 
and 
Intraperitoneal 
Nutrition (IPN) 
section 
IDPN and IPN involves infusing hyperalimentation fluids as part of dialysis, 
through the vascular shunt or intraperitoneally to normalize the amounts of 
albumin, glucose, and other nutrients in the blood stream to decrease 
morbidity and mortality associated with protein calorie malnutrition.  IDPN 
and IPN solutions are considered not covered for the recipient with a 
functioning gastrointestinal tract whose need for parenteral nutrition is only 
due to the following:  
 
• 
If IDPN or IPN is offered as an addition to regularly scheduled 
infusions of TPN 
• 
If  the recipient would not qualify as a candidate for TPN 
• 
A swallowing disorder 
• 
A temporary defect in gastric emptying such as a metabolic or 
electrolyte disorder 
• 
A psychological disorder, such as depression, impairing food intake 
• 
A metabolic disorder inducing anorexia, such as cancer 
• 
A physical disorder impairing food intake, such as dyspnea or severe 
pulmonary or cardiac disease 
• 
A side effect of medication 
• 
Renal failure and/or dialysis 
 
The following requirements must be met in order to bill for IDPN or IPN 
solutions: 
 
• 
Documentation in the medical record must validate the patient suffers 
from a permanently impaired gastrointestinal tract and that there is 
insufficient absorption of nutrients to maintain adequate strength and 
weight.   
• 
Documentation must include that the patient cannot be maintained on 
oral or enteral feedings and that due to severe pathology of the 
alimentary tract, IDPN or IPN must be given in order to meet 100% of 
the patient’s nutritional needs. 
 
October 2005 
28-23 
 
Physician  
• 
Infusions must be vital to the nutritional status of the recipient and not 
supplemental to a deficient diet or deficiencies caused by dialysis. 
Added: Infusions must 
be…caused by dialysis. 
 
Added: Physical signs, 
symptoms and… 
of enteral feeding. 
• 
Physical signs, symptoms and test results indicating severe pathology 
of the alimentary tract must be clearly documented in the medical 
record.  This would include creatinine (predialysis), serum albumin 
(predialysis), a low or declining serum cholesterol level, and 
phosphorus.  Medical records must document inability to maintain 
weight during a trial of at least four weeks of enteral feeding. 
Restrictions 
Added: Restrictions 
A few solutions used in TPN preparation are considered payable as part of 
the composite rate for dialysis and should not be billed separately by the 
pharmacist; these are as follows: 
 
• 
Glucose 
• 
Dextrose 
• 
Trace Elements 
• 
Multivitamins 
28.2.10 
Anesthesiology 
Administration of anesthesia is a covered service when administered by or 
directed by a duly licensed physician for a medical procedure that is 
covered by Medicaid. Medical direction by an anesthesiologist of more than 
four Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists (CRNAs) or Anesthesiology 
Assistants (AAs) concurrently will not be covered. 
Administration of anesthesia by an AA is a covered service when the AA 
has met the qualifications and standards set forth in Rule No. 540-X-7-.34 
of the Alabama Board of Medical Examiners. The AA must enroll and 
receive a provider number to bill the Alabama Medicaid Program. Refer to 
Chapter 38, Anesthesiology, for more information. 
28.2.11 
Obstetrical and Related Services 
The following policy refers to maternity care billed as fee-for-service and 
not as a part of the Maternity Care program. Refer to Chapter 24, Maternity 
Care Program, for more details. 
Physician visits for obstetrical care are counted as part of each recipient's 
benefit limit of 14 physician visits per year under the conditions listed 
below. 
Maternity Care and Delivery 
The services normally provided in maternity cases include antepartum 
care, delivery, and postpartum care. When a physician provides total 
obstetrical care, the procedure code which shall be filed on the claim form 
is the code for all-inclusive "global" care. The indicated date of service on 
"global" claims should be the date of delivery. If a woman is pregnant at the 
time she becomes eligible for Medicaid benefits, only those services 
provided during the time she is eligible will be covered.  
28-24 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
 
NOTE: 
When a physician provides eight (8) or more prenatal visits, performs 
the delivery, and provides the postpartum care, the physician must 
use a "global" obstetrical code in billing. 
If a physician submits a "global" fee for maternity care and delivery, the 
visits covered by these codes are not counted against the recipient's limit 
of 14 physician office visits a calendar year. For purposes of "global" 
obstetrical billing, services rendered by members of a group practice are to 
be considered as services rendered by a single provider. 
NOTE: 
The date of service on the “global” OB claim must be the date of 
delivery. 
Antepartum care includes all usual prenatal services such as initial office 
visit at which time pregnancy is diagnosed, initial and subsequent histories, 
physical examinations, blood pressure recordings, fetal heart tones, 
maternity counseling, etc.; therefore, additional claims for routine services 
should not be filed. Antepartum care also includes routine lab work (e.g., 
hemoglobin, hematocrit, chemical urinalysis, etc.); therefore, additional 
claims for routine lab work should not be filed. 
To justify billing for global antepartum care services, physicians must utilize 
the CPT-4 antepartum care global codes (either 4-6 visits or 7 or more 
visits), as appropriate. Claims for antepartum care filed in this manner do 
not count against the recipient's limit of 14 office visits per year. 
NOTE: 
Physicians who provide less than four (4) visits for antepartum care 
must utilize CPT-4 codes under office medical services when billing 
for these services. These office visit codes will be counted against the 
recipient's limit of 14 physician visits a calendar year. 
Billing for antepartum care services in addition to "global" care is not 
permissible. However, in cases of pregnancy complicated by toxemia, 
cardiac problems, diabetes, neurological problems or other conditions 
requiring additional or unusual services or hospitalization, claims for 
additional services may be filed. If the physician bills fragmented services 
in any case other than high-risk or complicated pregnancy and then bills a 
"global" code, the fragmented codes shall be recouped. Claims for such 
services involved in complicated or high risk pregnancies may be filed 
utilizing CPT codes for Office Medical Services. Claims for services 
involving complicated or high-risk pregnancies must indicate a diagnosis 
other than normal pregnancy and must be for services provided outside of 
scheduled antepartum visits. These claims for services shall be applied 
against the recipient's limit of 14 physician office visits a calendar year. 
 
October 2005 
28-25 
 
Physician  
Delivery and Postpartum Care 
Delivery shall include vaginal delivery (with or without episiotomy) or 
cesarean section delivery and all in-hospital postpartum care. More than 
one delivery fee may not be billed for a multiple birth (twins, triplets, etc.) 
delivery, regardless of delivery method(s). Delivery fees include all 
professional services related to the hospitalization and delivery which are 
provided by the physician; therefore, additional claims for physician's 
services in the hospital such as hospital admission, may not be filed in 
addition to a claim for delivery or a claim for "global" care. 
EXCEPTION: When a physician's first and only encounter with the 
recipient is for delivery ("walk-in" patient) he may bill for a hospital 
admission (history and physical) in addition to delivery charges. 
Postpartum care includes office visits following vaginal or cesarean section 
delivery for routine postpartum care within 62 days post delivery. Additional 
claims for routine visits during this time should not be filed.  
Delivery Only 
If the physician performs the delivery only, he must utilize the appropriate 
CPT-4 delivery only code (vaginal delivery only or C-section delivery only). 
More than one delivery fee may not be billed for a multiple birth (twins, 
triplets, etc.) delivery, regardless of the delivery method(s). Delivery fees 
include all professional services related to the hospitalization and delivery 
which are provided by the physician; therefore, additional claims for 
physician's services in the hospital such as hospital admission, may not be 
filed in addition to a claim for delivery only. 
EXCEPTION: When a physician's first and only encounter with the 
recipient is for delivery ("walk-in" patient) he may bill for a hospital 
admission (history and physical) in addition to delivery charges. 
Ultrasounds 
Obstetrical ultrasounds are limited to two per pregnancy. For patients 
covered under the maternity care waiver, refer to Chapter 24, Maternity 
Care Program. Generally, first ultrasounds are conducted to detect 
gestational age, multiple pregnancies, and major malformations. Second 
ultrasounds may be conducted to detect fetal growth disorders (intrauterine 
growth retardation, macrosomia) and anomalies that would appear later or 
may have been unrecognizable in the earlier scan. 
Additional ultrasounds may be prior approved by the Alabama Medicaid 
Agency if a patient's documented medical condition meets any of the 
following criteria: 
• 
Gestational diabetes with complications (Type 1 diabetes, vascular 
disease, hypertension, elevated alpha-fetoprotein values, poor patient 
compliance) 
• 
Failure to gain weight, evaluation of fetal growth 
• 
Pregnancy-induced hypertension 
• 
Vaginal bleeding of undetermined etiology 
• 
Coexisting adnexal mass 
• 
Abnormal amniotic fluid volume (polyhydramnios, oligohydramnios) 
28-26 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
• 
Pregnant trauma patient 
• 
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) 
• 
Monitoring for special tests such as fetoscopy, amniocentesis, or 
cervical cerclage placement 
• 
Assist in operations performed on the fetus in the uterus 
• 
Detection of fetal abnormalities with other indicators or risk factors 
(Low human chronic gonadotrophin (HCG) and high-unconjugated 
estriol (uE3) are predictive of an increased risk for Trisomy 18. 
Echogenic bowel grades 2 and 3 are indicative of an increased risk of 
cystic fibrosis and Trisomy 21) 
• 
Determination of fetal presentation 
• 
Suspected multiple gestation, serial evaluation of fetal growth in 
multiple gestation 
• 
Suspected hydatidiform mole 
• 
Suspected fetal death 
• 
Suspected uterine abnormality 
• 
Suspected abrupt placenta 
• 
Follow-up evaluation of placental location for identified placenta previa 
• 
Maternity Care subcontractors should contact the Primary Contractor 
for information regarding obstetrical ultrasounds. 
To determine if a procedure requires prior authorization, providers should 
use the AVRS line at EDS, 1-800-727-7848. 
28.2.12 
Vaccines For Children (VFC) 
The Department of Public Health provides vaccines at no charge to 
Medicaid providers enrolled in the Vaccines For Children (VFC) Program 
as recommended by the Advisory Committee on Immunization. 
Medicaid reimburses administration fees for vaccines provided free of 
charge through the VFC Program. The rate for the administration fee is 
$8.00; it is not the rate on the pricing file. Please refer to Appendix A, Well 
Child Check-Up, Section A.6.1 (Fees) for information regarding the use of 
designated VFC codes for billing immunization administration fee(s). 
A VFC provider may or may not choose to become an enrolled Medicaid 
provider. Enrollment as a VFC provider or a Medicaid provider is 
independent of each other. 
Refer to Appendix A, EPSDT, for procedure codes for VFC. 
28.2.13 
Lab Services 
Collection of laboratory specimens may be billed only when sending 
specimens to another site for analysis if the other site is not owned, 
operated, or financially associated with the site in which the specimen was 
collected.  The collection fee may not be billed if the lab work is done at the 
same site where the specimen was collected or in a lab owned, operated, 
or financially associated with the site in which the specimen was collected.  
 
October 2005 
28-27 
 
Physician  
Providers will not be paid for and should not submit claims for laboratory 
work done for them by independent laboratories or by hospital laboratories.   
Providers may submit claims for laboratory work done by them in their own 
offices or own laboratory facilities.  Providers who send specimens to 
independent laboratories for analysis may bill a collection fee.  This fee 
shall not be paid to any provider who has not actually extracted the 
specimen from the patient. 
NOTE: 
Providers should use procedure code 36415-90 for routine venipuncture 
collection, 36416-90 for collection of capillary blood specimen (e.g., finger, 
heal, ear stick) and Q0091-90 for collection of Pap smear specimen. 
 
Repeat Lab Procedures 
Modifier 91 may be utilized to denote a repeat clinical laboratory test 
performed on the dame date of service for the same recipient.  Providers 
should use modifier 91 instead of modifier 76 for repeat lab procedures. 
NOTE: 
A physician CANNOT bill the following pathology/laboratory procedure 
codes, however the above collection fee can be billed, if applicable: 
 
82775 Galactose – 1 – phosphate uridyl transferase; quantitative 
83498 Hydroxyprogesterone, 17 – d 
84030 Phenylalanine (PKU) blood 
84437 Thyroxine; total requiring elution (e.g., neonatal) 
28.2.14 
Supply Code 
The procedure code 99070 is utilized by physicians to bill for supplies and 
materials over and above those usually included with the office visit. 
Examples of supplies and materials over and beyond usual supplies 
include elastic wraps, disposable tubing for bronchial dilating equipment or 
post-operative dressing changes when no office visit is allowable. 
28.3 
Prior Authorization and Referral Requirements 
Medical care and services that require prior authorization for in-state 
providers will continue to require prior authorization for out-of-state 
providers, e.g., organ transplants and select surgical procedures. Please 
refer to Chapter 4, Obtaining Prior Authorization for more information. 
Unlisted services and procedure codes are not covered by the Alabama 
Medicaid Agency, with the exception of Medicare crossover claims and 
rare instances when approval is granted prior to service provision after the 
agency has determined that the service is covered and that no other 
procedure code exists for reimbursement. 
28.4 
Cost Sharing (Copayment) 
The copayment amount for physician office visit (including crossovers, and 
optometric) is $1.00 per visit. Copayment does not apply to services 
provided for pregnant women, nursing facility residents, recipients less 
than 18 years of age, emergencies, and family planning. 
28-28 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
The provider may not deny services to any eligible Medicaid recipient 
because of the recipient’s inability to pay the cost-sharing (copayment) 
amount imposed. 
28.5 
Completing the Claim Form 
To enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of Medicaid 
processing, providers should bill Medicaid claims electronically. 
Physicians who bill Medicaid claims electronically receive the 
following benefits: 
• 
Quicker claim processing turnaround 
• 
Immediate claim correction 
• 
Enhanced online adjustment functions 
 
�Electronic 
claims 
submission 
can save you 
time and 
money. The 
system alerts 
you to 
common 
errors and 
allows you to 
correct and 
resubmit 
claims online. 
• 
Improved access to eligibility information 
Refer to Appendix B, Electronic Media Claims Guidelines, for more 
information about electronic filing.  
NOTE: 
When filing a claim on paper, a CMS-1500 claim form is required. 
Medicare-related claims must be filed using the Medical 
Medicaid/Medicare-related Claim Form. 
This section describes program-specific claims information. Refer to 
Chapter 5, Filing Claims, for general claims filing information and 
instructions. 
28.5.1 
Time Limit for Filing Claims 
Medicaid requires all claims for physicians to be filed within one year of the 
date of service. Refer to Section 5.1.5, Filing Limits, for more information 
regarding timely filing limits and exceptions. 
28.5.2 
Diagnosis Codes 
The International Classification of Diseases - 9th Revision - Clinical 
Modification (ICD-9-CM) manual lists required diagnosis codes. These 
manuals may be obtained by contacting the American Medical Association, 
P.O. Box 10950, Chicago, IL 60610. 
NOTE: 
ICD-9 diagnosis codes must be listed to the highest number of digits 
possible (3, 4, or 5 digits). Do not use decimal points in the diagnosis code 
field. 
 
October 2005 
28-29 
 
Physician  
 
28.5.3 
Procedure Codes and Modifiers 
Medicaid uses the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System 
(HCPCS). HCPCS is composed of the following: 
• 
American Medical Association’s Current Procedural Terminology 
(CPT) 
• 
Nationally assigned codes developed for Medicare 
• 
Locally assigned codes issued by Medicaid.  Effective for dates of 
service on or after 01/01/2004, use national codes.   
Filing Claims with Modifiers 
Appropriate use of CPT and HCPCs modifiers is required to differentiate 
between sites and procedures.  It is necessary to append the appropriate 
anatomical modifiers to surgical codes to differentiate between multiple 
surgeries and sites. 
Appropriate Use of Modifiers 
Modifier 59 (Distinct Procedural Service) 
 
According to the CPT book, modifier 59 is described as being necessary to 
describe a distinct procedural service.  This modifier should only be used to 
show a distinct procedural service when a comprehensive/component 
coding pair is billed.  Modifier 59 should not be billed to represent that 
multiple services of the same procedure code were performed. 
 
A comprehensive/coding pair occurs when one code is considered a 
component procedure and the other code is considered a comprehensive 
procedure.  These code pairs are frequently referred to as bundled codes 
thus meaning the component code is usually considered an integral part of 
the comprehensive code.  Therefore, in most instances the most 
comprehensive code only should be billed and the component code should 
be denied as rebundled or mutually exclusive. 
 
Modifier 59 should only be used in conjunction with a 
comprehensive/coding pair procedure when appropriately unbundling the 
code pair.  This modifier 59 should not be billed with the comprehensive 
code.  The component code can be unbundled, or allowed separately, in 
certain situations.  If the two services are performed at two different times 
of day or the services are performed in two different anatomical sites, then 
modifier 59 can be submitted with the component procedure code.   
In order to communicate the special circumstances of the 
component/comprehensive code pair unbundling, diagnoses codes and 
anatomical modifiers must be utilized as appropriate on the claim form.  In 
some cases, it may be necessary to attach a copy of the Operative Report 
to further explain the reason for the unbundling of code pairs. 
 
Modifier 59 should never be used in any other circumstances and is 
subject to post payment review.  If the services performed and billed for a 
date of service does not include a coding pair described above, then 
modifier 59 is not valid or appropriate. 
28-30 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
 
NOTE: 
Modifier 59 is not to be used with Physician's Current Procedural 
Terminology (CPT) codes 99201-99499 or 77419-77430. 
 
Modifier 76 (Repeat Procedure) 
 
Prior to January 1, 2004, providers were advised to file multiple services 
with modifiers Y2-Y9 and Z2-Z3 to avoid services being denied as 
duplicates.  Since these modifiers have been eliminated, we are revising 
instructions for filing multiple services that are performed on the same 
day.  . The appropriate use of CPT and HCPCS codes is required when 
filing claims.  In addition, diagnosis codes and modifiers should assist with 
accurately describing services billed.  It is necessary to append the 
appropriate anatomical modifiers to procedure codes to differentiate 
between multiple sites.  If a claim drops for manual review, the 
appropriate use of diagnosis codes and modifiers may assist claim 
reviewers in determining the intent of billing without having to request 
documentation.  As always, providers can continue to file modifiers RT 
and LT when two of the same procedure is performed and one is on the 
right side and one is on the left side of the body.  However, if more than 
one service is performed on the right or left side, services could be denied 
as duplicates if more than one RT or LT modifier is filed on the same 
procedure code.  Modifier 76 is defined by the CPT as “Repeat Procedure 
by Same Physician”.  Therefore, we are providing the following 
instructions to educate providers on how to submit those services. 
 
1) If multiple services are performed, anatomical modifiers can be filed in 
addition to modifier 76 on the second line item.  Anatomical modifiers are:  
LT, RT, E1-E4, F1-F9, FA, T1-T9, and TA. 
 
Date of Service Place 
Procedure 
Number of Services 
2/4/03-2/4/03 
11 
73580-RT 
1 
2/4/03-2/4/03 
11 
73580-RT76 
1 
 
2) If multiple services are performed, anatomical modifiers can be used 
without modifier 76. 
 
Date of Service Place 
Procedure 
Number of Services 
2/4/04-2/4/03 
11 
28820-T8 
1 
2/4/03-2/4/03 
11 
28820-TA 
1 
 
Multiple services (excluding most surgeries) can also be filed with multiple 
units of service.  Modifier 76 is defined as “repeat procedure by same 
physician”. The Agency requires claims filed with multiple units of service be 
submitted as shown below.  
 
3)  The first line must be submitted with only one unit of service and the 
second line with modifier 76 can show the additional number of services that 
were performed that day. 
 
Date of Service Place 
Procedure 
Number of Services 
2/4/03-2/4/03 
11 
88305-TC 
1 
2/4/03-2/4/03 
11 
88305-TC76 
3 
 
October 2005 
28-31 
 
Physician  
 
Modifier 50 (Bilateral Procedures) 
 
Modifier 50 represents a bilateral service was performed.  For example, if 
bilateral joint injections are administered into the shoulders, the services 
should be filed as follows: 
 
Date of Service Place 
Procedure 
Number of Services 
2/4/03-2/4/03 
11 
20610-50 
1 
 
There should be only one line item submitted with modifier 50, one unit of 
service and a submitted amount to cover both procedures.  The modifier 50 
instructs our system to pay for the procedure with the highest allowed 
amount and half of the allowed amount for each subsequent procedure. 
 
Procedure Codes 
The CPT manual lists most procedure codes required by Medicaid. This 
manual may be obtained by contacting the Order Department, American 
Medical Association, 515 North State Street, Chicago, IL 60610-9986.  The 
(837) Professional electronic claim and the paper claim have been modified 
to accept up to four Procedure Code Modifiers. 
NOTE: 
Unlisted procedure codes are not covered by the Agency unless the 
provider requested and received approval for a prior authorization before 
the service is rendered.  The Agency will deny all requests for payment of 
unlisted codes after the fact. 
Physician-Employed Physician Assistants (PA) and Certified 
Registered Nurse Practitioners (CRNP) 
Payment will be made only for physician drugs identified in Appendix H, 
Alabama Medicaid Physician Drug List, CPT codes identified in Appendix O, 
CRNP and PA Services, and laboratory services, which are CLIA certified. 
EPSDT screenings will be covered only if the provider is enrolled in that 
program. Refer to Appendix A, EPSDT, for EPSDT program requirements. 
The Physician's Assistant or CRNP can make physician required inpatient 
visits to nursing facilities. However, physician required inpatient visits to 
hospitals or other institutional settings cannot be made by a PA or CRNP. 
Also, the PA or CRNP may provide low complexity or straightforward 
medical decision-making services in the emergency room or assist at 
surgery (identified surgical codes only) for Medicaid reimbursement.  
 
Surgical Procedure Codes Not Included in Global Surgical Package 
 
Certain relatively small surgical procedure codes formally designated in the 
CPT with an (*) may be billed in addition to an office visit.  Additionally, 
these codes do not carry the global surgical package concept of inclusion of 
post-operative care within 62 days of the surgery.  In the 2004 CPT 
guidelines the (*) designation has been removed.  For reference, these 
codes are listed below the covered services section in Chapter 28 of the 
Billing Manual. 
28-32 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
Surgical Procedure Code Modifiers 
When submitting claims for procedures done on the same date of service, a 
modifier is required to indicate that the repeated service is not a duplicate. If 
the same provider performs the repeat procedure, use modifier 76.  
For repeat procedures done on the same date of service by a different 
provider, use modifier 77. Claims submitted for repeat procedures on the 
same date of service without modifiers are denied as duplicate services. 
Modifier 
Description 
76 
Repeat Procedure By Same Physician.  Modifier indicates a procedure of 
service is repeated by the same physician subsequent to the original 
service.  This situation may be reported by adding modifier 76 to the five-
digit procedure code. 
77 
Repeat Procedure By Another Physician modifier indicates that a basic 
procedure performed by another physician had to be repeated. This 
situation may be reported by adding modifier 77 to the five-digit 
procedure code. 
59 
Distinct procedural service modifier indicates that a service or procedure 
was distinct or separate from other services performed on the same day. 
This may represent a different session or patient encounter, different 
procedure or surgery, different site, separate lesion, or separate injury (or 
area of injury in extensive injuries). 
 
 
Procedure Codes 
 
58100 
58300 
58340 
58350 
59000 
59020 
59030 
60000 
61000 
61001 
61020 
61026 
61050 
61055 
61070 
61105 
61107 
61210 
62268 
62269 
62270 
62272 
62273 
62280 
62281 
62282 
62284 
62290 
62291 
64400 
36000 
36405 
36406 
36410 
36415 
36440 
36470 
36471 
36488 
36489 
36490 
36491 
36510 
36600 
36660 
38300 
40800 
40804 
41000 
41005 
41250 
41251 
41252 
41800 
42000 
42300 
42310 
42320 
42400 
42650 
10040 
10060 
10080 
10120 
10140 
10160 
11000 
11200 
11300 
11305 
11310 
11730 
11900 
11901 
12001 
12002 
12004 
12011 
12013 
12031 
12032 
12041 
12051 
15786 
16020 
16025 
17000 
17110 
17250 
17260 
 
October 2005 
28-33 
 
Physician  
 
Procedure Codes 
 
42660 
42700 
43450 
43760 
45900 
45905 
45915 
46030 
46050 
46080 
46320 
46900 
46910 
47000 
48102 
49080 
49081 
49180 
49400 
49420 
50200 
50390 
50398 
50688 
51000 
51005 
51600 
51700 
51705 
51710 
53600 
53601 
53620 
53621 
53660 
53661 
54050 
54055 
54200 
55000 
55100 
56405 
56420 
56605 
56606 
56720 
57020 
57100 
57150 
57160 
57400 
57410 
57452 
57454 
17270 
17280 
17340 
17360 
17380 
19000 
19100 
20000 
20206 
20500 
20501 
20520 
20525 
20550 
20600 
20605 
20610 
20650 
20665 
20670 
21100 
21315 
21355 
23700 
24640 
27086 
27256 
27257 
27275 
27605 
27860 
28001 
28002 
28190 
28630 
28635 
28660 
28665 
30000 
30020 
30200 
30210 
30300 
30560 
30801 
30901 
30903 
30905 
30906 
31000 
31002 
32000 
32400 
32420 
64402 
64405 
64408 
64410 
64412 
64413 
64415 
64417 
64418 
64420 
64421 
64425 
64430 
64435 
64445 
64450 
64505 
64508 
64510 
64520 
64530 
65205 
65210 
65220 
65222 
65270 
65410 
65430 
65435 
65800 
65805 
66030 
67500 
67515 
67700 
67710 
67715 
67810 
67820 
67825 
67840 
67850 
68135 
68200 
68440 
68801 
68810 
68840 
68850 
69000 
69020 
69420 
69421 
69433 
28-34 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
 
Procedure Codes 
 
32960 
33010 
33011 
57500 
57511 
57800 
 
Professional and Technical Components 
Some procedure codes in the 70000, 80000, 90000, and G series are a 
combination of a professional component and a technical component. 
Therefore, these codes may be billed one of three different ways; (1) as a 
global, (2) as a professional component, or (3) as a technical component. 
NOTE: Not all providers are allowed to bill any or all of the three ways to 
bill. Specific coverage questions should be addressed to the Provider 
Assistance Center. 
• 
Global, the provider must own the equipment, pay the technician, 
review the results, and provide a written report of the findings. The 
procedure code is billed with no modifiers. The Global component 
should be billed only for the following place of service locations: 
− 
11 (Office) 
− 
81 (Independent Laboratory) 
• 
Professional component, the provider does not own or operate the 
equipment. The provider reviews the results, and provides a written 
report of the findings. The Radiological professional component is 
billed by adding modifier 26 to the procedure code, and should be 
billed only for the following place of service locations: 
− 
21 (inpatient hospital) 
− 
22 (outpatient hospital) 
− 
23 (emergency room - hospital) 
− 
51 (inpatient psychiatric facility) 
− 
61 (comprehensive inpatient rehab facility) 
− 
62 (comprehensive outpatient rehab facility) 
− 
65 (end-stage renal disease facility) 
− 
81 (Independent Laboratory) 
• 
Technical component, the provider must own the equipment, but 
does not review and document the results. The technical component 
charges are the facility’s charges and are not billed separately by 
physicians. The technical component is billed by adding modifier TC to 
the procedure code. The technical component can only be billed by 
facilities. 
28.5.4 
Billing for Patient 1st Referred Service 
Please refer to Chapter 39 for information regarding the Patient 1st 
Program and Patient 1st referrals.  Please refer to Chapter 5, Filing Claims, 
for information regarding filing claims for a Patient 1st referral.  
 
 
October 2005 
28-35 
 
Physician  
28.5.5 
Place of Service Codes 
The following place of service codes apply when filing claims for 
physicians: 
POS 
Description 
11 
Office 
12 
Home 
21 
Inpatient Hospital 
22 
Outpatient Hospital 
23 
Emergency Room - Hospital 
24 
Ambulatory Surgical Center 
25 
Birthing Center 
26 
Military Treatment Facility 
31 
Skilled Nursing Facility or Nursing Facility 
32 
Nursing Facility 
33 
Custodial Care Facility 
34 
Hospice 
41 
Ambulance - Land 
42 
Ambulance - Air or water 
51 
Inpatient Psychiatric Facility 
52 
Psy. Fac. Partial Hospitalization 
53 
Community Mental Health Center 
54 
Intermediate Care Fac./Mentally Retarded 
55 
Residential Substance Abuse Treatment Facility 
56 
Psychiatric Residential Treatment Center 
61 
Comprehensive Inpatient Rehabilitation Facility 
62 
Comprehensive Outpatient Rehabilitation Facility 
65 
End Stage Renal Disease Treatment Facility 
71 
State or Local Public Health Clinic 
72 
Rural Health Clinic 
 
28.5.6 
Required Attachments 
To enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of Medicaid processing, your 
attachments should be limited to the following circumstances: 
• 
Claims With Third Party Denials 
NOTE: 
When an attachment is required, a hard copy CMS-1500 claim form 
must be submitted. 
Refer to Section 5.7, Required Attachments, for more information on 
attachments. 
28.5.7 
Consent Forms Required Before Payments 
Can Be Made 
NOTE: 
EDS will NOT pay any claims to ANY provider until a correctly 
completed original of the appropriate form is on file at EDS. 
28-36 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
Abortions 
In accordance with federal law, abortions are covered only (1) if the 
pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest; or (2) where a woman 
suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness, 
including a life-endangering physical condition caused by or arising from 
the pregnancy itself, that would, as certified by a physician, place the 
woman in danger of death unless an abortion is performed. 
Please refer to Appendix E, Medicaid Forms, for a copy of the PHY-96-2 
Certification and Documentation for Abortion form, which is used when the 
pregnancy is causing the life of the mother to be in danger. In the case of 
abortions performed secondary to pregnancies resulting from rape or 
incest, the documentation required is a letter from the recipient or provider 
certifying that the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest. 
• 
The original copy of the PHY-96-2 form (for life of the mother in 
danger) signed by the attending physician, or the certification letter 
regarding rape or incest, and a copy of the medical records (history 
and physical, operative report and discharge summary) must be 
submitted to EDS. 
• 
The second copy of the consent form or certification letter must be 
placed in the recipient’s medical record. 
• 
Copies of the consent form or certification letter may need to be 
provided to hospital, laboratory or other providers as applicable in 
order for them to submit billing for their services. 
All claims relating to abortions must have the above-specified 
documentation on file at EDS prior to payment. 
 
This documentation is not required when a recipient presents with a 
spontaneous abortion. 
 
If the recipient does not qualify for payment by Medicaid and elects to have the 
abortion, providers may bill the recipient for the abortion as a non-covered 
service. 
Sterilization 
EDS must have on file the Medicaid-approved sterilization form. Refer to 
Appendix C, Family Planning, for more information. 
Sterilization by Hysterectomy 
Payment is not available for a hysterectomy if: 
1. It was performed solely for the purpose of rendering an individual permanently 
incapable of reproducing 
2. If there was more than one purpose to the procedure, it would not have been 
performed but for the purpose of rendering the individual permanently 
incapable of reproducing 
Hysterectomy procedures performed for the sole purpose of rendering an 
individual incapable of reproducing are not covered under Medicaid. 
Hysterectomies done as a medical necessity as treatment of disease can be 
paid for by the Medicaid funds under the physician's program. 
 
October 2005 
28-37 
 
Physician  
 
NOTE: 
Sterilization performed for the sole purpose of rendering a person 
permanently incapable of reproducing is not available to persons under 
twenty-one (21) years of age under the Medicaid Program. 
Refer to Appendix E, Medicaid Forms, for a sample of the sterilization form. 
Hysterectomy 
The hysterectomy consent form was recently revised. The form was revised to 
include a section for unusual circumstances. Now this form can be used by a 
physician to certify a patient was already sterile when the hysterectomy was 
performed; a hysterectomy was performed under a life threatening situation; 
or a hysterectomy was performed under a period of retroactive Medicaid 
eligibility. In all of these circumstances, medical records must be forwarded to 
EDS along with the hysterectomy consent form and claim(s) in order for a 
State review to be performed. 
NOTE: 
The doctor’s explanation to the patient that the operation will make her 
sterile and the doctor’s and recipient’s signature must precede the 
operation except in the case of medical emergency. 
 
It is also important to note that certain fields on the hysterectomy consent form 
are non-correctable. The non-correctable fields include the recipient’s 
signature and date of signed informed consent, the provider’s signature and 
date of informed consent and the representative’s signature and date of 
informed consent (if the recipient requires a representative to sign for them). If 
a non-correctable field is missing, contains invalid information or indicates the 
recipient/representative or physician signed after the date of surgery, EDS will 
deny the consent form. 
EDS must have on file a Medicaid-approved Hysterectomy Consent Form. 
The revised hysterectomy consent form (form # PHY-81243) becomes 
effective January 1, 2004. Instructions for completing the consent form will be 
on the back of the consent form. See Appendix E, Medicaid Forms, or visit our 
website for a sample copy of this form.  
Please note, only the surgeon should submit a hysterectomy consent form to 
EDS. All other providers should not request and submit copies of the consent 
form. Multiple copies slow down the consent form review and claims payment 
process. 
Exceptions That Do Not Require Consent 
If the following situations, the consent form is not required. If consent is not 
required, the reason must be stated on the claim.  
1. The physician who performed the hysterectomy certifies in writing that the 
patient was already sterile when the hysterectomy was performed; the cause 
of sterility must be stated in this written statement.  
28-38 
October 2005 
Physician 28 
2. The physician who performed the hysterectomy certifies in writing that the 
hysterectomy was performed under a life-threatening emergency situation in 
which prior acknowledgement was not possible. This written statement must 
include a description of the nature of the emergency.  
3. The hysterectomy was performed during a period of retroactive Medicaid 
eligibility, and the physician who performed the hysterectomy submits, in lieu 
of the consent form, a written statement certifying that the individual was 
informed before the operation that the hysterectomy would make her sterile. 
NOTE: 
Medicaid payment cannot be made for any claims for services 
provided in connection with an abortion, a sterilization procedure or a 
hysterectomy for medical reasons unless an approved consent form is 
on file. Please be aware consent for sterilization is different from 
consent for hysterectomy. See Appendix M, Medicaid Forms, for 
examples of each. 
 
28.6 
For More Information 
This section contains a cross-reference to other relevant sections in the 
manual. 
Resource 
Where to Find It 
CMS-1500 Claim Filing Instructions 
Section 5.2 
Medical Medicaid/Medicare-related Claim Filing 
Instructions 
Section 5.6.1 
Anesthesiology 
Chapter 38 
EPSDT 
Appendix A 
Electronic Media Claims (EMC) Submission 
Guidelines 
Appendix B 
Family Planning 
Appendix C 
Alabama Medicaid Injectable Drug List 
Appendix H 
AVRS Quick Reference Guide 
Appendix L 
Alabama Medicaid Contact Information 
Appendix N 
CRNP and PA Services 
Appendix O 
 
 
October 2005 
28-39 
 
Physician  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally left blank. 
28-40 
October 2005 
