Finance, Audit and Compliance Committee  
Meeting Minutes 
Board of Game and Inland Fisheries 
4000 West Broad Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23230 
 
October 7, 2009 
3:30pm 
 
Present:  John Montgomery, Jr., Chairman and Dr. William T. Greer; Director: Robert 
“Bob” W. Duncan; Chief Operating Officer: Matt Koch; Senior Leadership Team:  
Ray Davis, Larry Hart, Larry Harizanoff, Charlie Sledd, Colonel Dabney “Dee” Watts 
and David Whitehurst:  LDP Fellow: Prashant Dixit 
 
The Chairman welcomed everyone and called the meeting to order at 3:30pm.   
 
Approval of the May 11, 2009 Committee Meeting Minutes:  The Chairman called for 
a motion to approve the May l1, 2009 Committee Meeting Minutes.  Dr. Greer made 
the following motion:  I hereby move the minutes of the meeting be approved as 
submitted.  Mr. Montgomery Second the motion.  Ayes: Montgomery and Greer.  
 
2010 Legislative Update:   The Chairman called upon Mr. Charlie Sledd to provide an 
update on the Agency Legislative Proposals for the 2010 General Assembly.  Mr. Sledd 
indicated that the agency’s nine proposals had been sent to all of the Board Members 
when they were submitted to the Secretary of Natural Resources at the end of August.  
September 9th was the last day for Cabinet Secretaries to screen proposals and send 
approved proposals to the Department of Planning and Budget (DPB) and the Governor’s 
Policy Office.  October 21st is the next deadline and is the last day for DPB to complete 
full review of legislative proposals and forward comments to the Governor’s Policy 
Office. November 30th is the target date for the Governor to complete review of agency 
legislative proposals.  An update will be provided at the next meeting.  
 
Mr. Montgomery thanked Mr. Sledd for his efforts in meeting all of the required 
deadlines.   
 
Presentation of the Financial Statement:  The Chairman called upon Mr. Matt Koch for 
the presentation of the Financial Statement.  Mr. Koch reported on the Agency’s Budget-
to-Actuals performance for FY2009.  Included in the budget background information as 
that:  
 
• Revenue was below appropriations and therefore was the limiting factor in FY 
2009. 
• Operating Forecast was 99% accurate. 
• Actual capital revenue was $600,000 over forecast due to a federal fisheries grant 
being re-designated for Coursey Springs. 
Final Page 1 of Final Page 5 
• Budget adjustments were mandated by the Administration and had the desired 
impact of reducing Agency expenses. 
 
Revenue continues to be a concern for the Agency.  Boating revenue is projected to 
decline in FY 2010.  The Agency plans to incorporate an Indirect Cost Rate on federal 
grants that will result in capturing an additional $1,800,000 in Federal revenue and the 
Pittman Robertson Fund is expected to increase 40% due to increased firearm and 
ammunition sales. 
 
DGIF will perform quarterly budget reviews and reallocate divisional budgets based on 
then-current Agency priorities. 
 
Mr. Koch noted that an appendix was attached to the handout reflecting the Revenue by 
Source and the Budget to Actual Expenditures for FY 2009. A discussion was held by the 
Committee and Staff on the projected revenue.  
 
Mr. Montgomery thanked Mr. Koch for his report. 
 
Small Purchase Charge Card Report:  Mr. Montgomery called upon Mr. John Moore 
to present the Small Purchase Charge Card Report for the months of March-August 2009. 
SPCC training continues for staff to improve reporting requirements with in agency 
policy and state guidelines. Staff continues to perform 10% random audits of these cards. 
A discussion was held between the Committee and staff on the use of the card.  
 
The Chairman thanked Mr. Moore for his report. 
 
 Auditor of Public Accounts Update:  Mr. Montgomery called upon Mr. Moore to 
provide an update from the Auditor of Public Accounts.  Mr. Moore stated an exit 
interview was conducted to day with the Dr. Greer, the Director and COO.  The report 
indicates only one finding- the agency does not have a documented BIA (Business 
Impact Analysis).  Mr. Moore indicated this plan would be completed by the end of this 
calendar year.  An update will be provided at the next meeting. Mr. Duncan thanked 
everyone for their work. Mr. Montgomery thanked Dr. Greer for his participation in this 
briefing.  
 
The Chairman thanked Mr. Moore for his report.  
 
Media Services Quarterly Report:  Mr. Montgomery called upon Mr. Lee Walker to 
present the 2009 third Quarter Media Services Report. Mr. Walker highlighted some of 
the numerous activities of the Information and Education Division, Information Section. 
 
In the fourth quarter of FY2009, approximately 166 media inquiries/interviews were 
fielded by the Media Relations Coordinator and 15 news releases were distributed to 
Virginia outdoor writes and mainstream news media on such topics as:  White-Nose 
Syndrome in bats in Virginia; Eagle Cam (joint with the Norfolk Botanical Garden) and 
Operation Dry Water just to name a few.   
Final Page 2 of Final Page 5 
 
Six editions of the Outdoor Report were published on schedule, bi-monthly the second 
and fourth Wednesdays of each month during this quarter.  The Outdoor Report 
subscription list has grown from 16,000 subscriptions in December 2008, which it was 
first launched, to 23,100 which the distribution for the June 24th edition.  During this 
quarter, web production staff made significant changes to the format to enhance delivery 
with faster downloads.  Major changes include: subscribers now get an introductory 
email with a link to the full Outdoor Report on the internet.  This cuts down on 
downloading time for subscribers, especially those with dial-up access and enhanced 
formatting that allows readers to click on specific sections rather scroll through the entire 
newsletter.   
 
In addition to all of the other activities of the Division, staff participated in the National 
Wild Turkey Federation annual fund raising banquet; assisted with the Butch Trinca 
Memorial Turkey Hunt for Disable Sportsmen in Albemarle in partnership with NWTF 
volunteers and their Wheelin’ Sportsmen Program; and the Annual Wheelin’ Sportsmen 
Awards Banquet in Fishersville.   
 
The Video production stayed active with the production of a new combo DVD featuring 
Panfish Filleting and Squirrel Skinning Quick and Easy; production of  Boating Safety 
PSA for the Boating Safety Education Campaign.  Videos were also sent for post on 
MyOutdoorTV.com:  Looking Back, Moving Forward: Our Continuing Mission; Virginia 
Conservation Police Officers and Habitat at Home.   
 
Our Webmaster stays busy with the Agency Website now home to approximately 3,800 
pages including many web-based applications that enable customer transactions and 
public input.  Highlights included advertisements for use on the Virginia Tech 
HokieSports.com website to promote fishing licenses and boating safety education as part 
of an advertising contract which concluded at the end of the fiscal year; developed new 
pages to support White-Nosed Syndrome information and developed a set of pages and 
graphics to support the Department’s involvement in Operation Dry Water and 
coordinated with the Angling Education and Video Production sections to begin work on 
a series of “Fishing 101” videos and web pages.   
 
The Virginia Wildlife Magazine continues to be the Agency’s flagship publication.  
Magazine highlights during this quarter included hunting features about spring gobblers 
and two, hunting-related land preservations stories.  Fishing features covered the James 
River catfish fishery, a historical look at the Chickahominy River Fisheries, and several 
photo essays.  Other features covered important Department news, such as the new 
Merrimac Farm property, and a celebration of wild foods and habitat diversity.  Also 
covered were a primer on beekeeping, a spotlight on the Rice Center, and a bluebird 
research project.   
 
The 2009-2010 Hunting Regulations were published during this quarter; 400,000 copies 
are in the process of being distributed to the 650-plus license agents.  As a cost savings 
measure, the Hunting Regulations were totally redesigned and the number of pages 
Final Page 3 of Final Page 5 
reduced from 80 to 56 in both the 2009 and 2010 editions.  Advertising also continued 
within this year’s digest.  Both efforts will, collectively, save about a third in over all 
printing and shipping cost.   
 
Mr. Walker also covered the 2009 Lapsed Angler Direct mail Marketing Program and 
preliminary results of the 2009 direct mail marketing efforts will be available in 
September 2009 and a full report will be available by December 2009.   
 
The Apprentice Hunting License Marketing Plan is in its second year and continues to 
utilize VDGIF publications, such as Virginia Wildlife magazine, Hunting Regulations, 
Virginia Wildlife Calendar, VDGIF Website, brochures, fliers, wallet card reminders, 
new license carriers and newspaper advertising as well as press releases and story pitches 
to reporters.  Marketing efforts began July 1, 2009, and continued through April 2010.  
As of June 2009, 4,182 resident Apprentice Hunting Licenses and 606 non resident 
Apprentice Hunting licenses have been sold.   
 
Mr. Walker gave a brief overview of the 2009 Lapsed Hunter Direct Mail Marketing 
Program. In May 2009, the Agency was notified by the National Shooting Sports 
Foundation that the agency has been awarded a $79,000 one year grant.  The overall 
purpose of the NSSF/VDGIF Lapsed Hunter Grant is to develop a communication or 
outreach program/projects to recruit lapsed hunters.  VDGIF has partnered with NSSF, 
Southwick Associates, Mile Creek Communications, and Responsive Management to 
develop a comprehensive, integrated marketing approach to target lapsed hunters with a 
future goal of implementing a marketing strategy to motivate hunters to by a hunting 
license in the future (Fall 2010).  An update on this program will be provided at the next 
meeting.   
 
The office of boating safety has been busy preparing materials and providing information 
to the public to implement the new Boating Safety Education requirement that went into 
effect July 1, 2009.  The staff has developed a dockside Safety Checklist and a new 
lifetime Virginia Boating Safety Education card.  Staff continues to utilize a variety of 
marketing techniques to help inform the public about the new boating safety education 
requirement through paid advertising, posters and other pamphlets.  This year 
approximately 200 classroom courses have been held.  
 
The Chairman thanked Mr. Walker for his report.  
 
Internal Auditor Report:  The Chairman called upon Mr. John Allen for his report.  Mr. 
Allen reported that two internal audit reports were already issued this fiscal year.  There 
were no significant findings.  The annual Information Security Audit will begin with an 
entrance conference next week.  The APA recently conducted a state-wide survey of 
internal audit structures and hotline functions at various agencies within the 
Commonwealth. Mr. Allen has provided answers to those questions.  The Chairman 
asked whether the agency would receive a copy of the comparative results, and Mr. Allen 
said that he would seek clarification whether the agency would receive a draft report or 
Final Page 4 of Final Page 5 
simply the final comparison report.  A draft internal audit plan was submitted to the 
committee chairman recently. 
 
A brief discussion was held by Committee and Mr. Allen.  The Chairman thanked Mr. 
Allen for his report.  
 
Other Business/Additional Comments: The Chairman called upon Mr. Duncan for any 
additional comments.  Mr. Duncan stated the Agency received to DHS grants to purchase 
Safe Boats and Equipment for the Law Enforcement Division.  Mr. Duncan thanked Law 
Enforcement and Mr. Tom Wilcox for their efforts in obtaining this grant.   
 
Mr. Duncan stated during the October Board Meeting, a full report will be presented on 
the Youth Hunting Day.   
 
The Chairman thanked Dr. Greer for his attendance today. 
 
The Chairman announced the next meeting will be held on November 17th, 2009 at 
5:30pm. 
 
There being no additional business, the meeting was adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beth Drewery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Board Secretary 
 
 
 
Final Page 5 of Final Page 5 
