SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
(Release No. 34-54941; File No. SR-Phlx-2006-70)  
December 14, 2006  
Self-Regulatory Organizations; Philadelphia Stock Exchange, Inc.; Notice of Filing and 
Immediate Effectiveness of Proposed Rule Change and Amendment No. 1 Thereto To 
Adopt Fees for the Trading of Equity Securities on XLE 
Pursuant to Section 19(b)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (“Act”),1 and Rule 
19b-4 thereunder,2 notice is hereby given that on November 2, 2006, the Philadelphia Stock 
Exchange, Inc. (“Phlx” or “Exchange”) filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(“Commission”) the proposed rule change as described in Items I, II, and III below, which Items 
have been prepared by the Phlx.  On December 12, 2006, the Exchange filed Amendment No. 1 
to the proposed rule change.3  The Exchange has designated this amended proposal as one 
establishing or changing a due, fee, or other charge imposed by the Exchange under Section 
19(b)(3)(A),4 and Rule 19b-4(f)(2) thereunder,5 which renders the proposal effective upon filing 
with the Commission. The Commission is publishing this notice to solicit comments on the 
proposed rule change, as amended, from interested persons. 
1 
15 U.S.C. 78s(b)(1). 
2 
17 CFR 240.19b-4. 
3 
In Partial Amendment No. 1, which supplemented the proposal as originally filed, the Exchange 
made several clarifying changes to further explain the assessment of the proposed fees in 
connection with its new equity trading system and made other technical changes to the original 
filing. In addition, the Exchange included a revised Exhibit 5A in Partial Amendment No. 1 to 
reflect technical and clarifying changes made therein, which, for clarity and ease of reference, 
replaces the Exhibit 5A contained in the original filing.  The Exchange did not propose any new 
fees in Partial Amendment No. 1. 
4 
15 U.S.C. 78s(b)(3)(A). 
5 
17 CFR 240.19b-4(f)(2). 
I.  
Self-Regulatory Organization’s Statement of the Terms of Substance of the 
Proposed Rule Change 
The Phlx proposes to adopt the proposed fees described below for the trading of equity 
securities on the Exchange in connection with its new equity system (“XLE”).6  With XLE, the 
Exchange no longer operates a physical trading floor for equity securities or the Philadelphia 
Stock Exchange Automated Communication and Execution (“PACE”) system.7  Therefore, the 
Exchange proposes to adopt a new fee schedule to accommodate the trading of equity securities 
on XLE and to amend Appendix A of the Exchange’s fee schedule to adopt XLE-related fees, 
delete obsolete fees, and modify other fees that will no longer apply to equity trading.8  The text 
of the proposed rule change is available on the Phlx’s Web site at http://www.phlx.com, at the 
Phlx’s Office of the Secretary, and at the Commission’s Public Reference Room.9 
II.  
Self-Regulatory Organization’s Statement of the Purpose of, and Statutory Basis 
for, the Proposed Rule Change 
In its filing with the Commission, Phlx included statements concerning the purpose of, 
and basis for, the proposed rule change and discussed any comments it received on the proposal.  
The text of these statements may be examined at the places specified in Item IV below.  Phlx has 
6 
XLE is designed to provide the opportunity for entirely automated executions to occur within a 
central matching system accessible by Exchange members and member organizations and their 
Sponsored Participants.  See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 54538 (September 28, 2006), 
71 FR 59184 (October 6, 2006) (SR-Phlx-2006-43). 
7 
PACE was the Exchange’s order routing, delivery, execution and reporting system for its equity 
trading floor.  The Commission notes that XLE commenced limited operations on November 10, 
2006.   
8 
Although the fees proposed herein have been filed to become immediately effective, the fees will 
not become operative until the Exchange discontinues its physical equities trading floor and 
commences operation of XLE.  See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 54538 (September 28, 
2006), 71 FR 59184 (October 6, 2006) (SR-Phlx-2006-43) (order approving XLE rules).  The 
Commission notes that XLE commenced limited operations on November 10, 2006. 
9 
The Stock Clearing Corporation of Philadelphia (“SCCP”) filed a separate proposed rule change 
with the Commission to amend its fee schedule to reflect fees associated with the trade processing 
of equity securities through SCCP in connection with XLE.  See SR-SCCP-2006-04. 
2 
prepared summaries, set forth in Sections A, B, and C below, of the most significant aspects of 
such statements. 
A. 
 Self-Regulatory Organization’s Statement of the Purpose of, and 
Statutory Basis for, the Proposed Rule Change 
1. 
 Purpose 
The purpose of the proposed rule change is to adopt a fee schedule for the trading of 
equity securities on the Exchange in connection with XLE. The XLE fee schedule includes 
transaction fees (execution and routing fees), covered sale fees, and system fees, as well as a 
market data revenue sharing proposal.  Changes to Appendix A of the Exchange’s fee schedule 
include permit fees, application fees, and a modified examination fee, as well as the deletion of 
certain floor-based fees.  All the proposed fees will be assessed on Exchange members or 
member organizations, which may include Sponsoring Member Organizations,10 (collectively 
referred to herein as “member organizations”).  Sponsoring Member Organizations are 
responsible for the fees generated by their Sponsored Participant’s activities. 
Transaction Fees 
With respect to securities trading at or above $1.00, the Exchange intends to charge 
member organizations an execution fee, ranging from $0.0026 to $0.003 per share, depending on 
the number of total shares executed monthly,11 for orders that remove liquidity from XLE.  
10 
A Sponsoring Member Organization is a member organization that has authorized access to XLE 
for a Sponsored Participant (a person who has access to XLE which is authorized by a Sponsoring 
Member Organization).  See Phlx Rules 1(jj) and 1(kk). 
11 
The “total monthly shares” executed includes executions resulting from removing and providing 
liquidity on XLE and crosses executed on XLE, as well as shares executed when routed via XLE 
to an away trading center and executed on that away trading center, except for liquidity provided 
by incoming NMS Linkage Orders or ITS Commitments.  The total monthly shares will be 
calculated separately per XLE Participant Organization, which, for purposes of this proposal, 
refers to Sponsored Participants, Sponsoring Member Organizations, and member organizations 
without Sponsored Participants.  Thus, Sponsored Participant activity will accrete towards that 
Sponsored Participant’s volume tier and not towards the Sponsoring Member Organization’s 
3 
Additionally, the Exchange intends to offer an execution credit to member organizations, ranging 
from $0.002 to $0.0026 per share, for orders that provide liquidity to XLE. Any available credits 
would be applied to the member organization’s monthly invoice.  Excess credits would be 
carried over into subsequent months or rebated to the applicable member organization, as 
requested by the member organization. 
The purpose of adopting the volume tiers in connection with the assessment of 
transaction fees is to encourage XLE Participant Organizations to send and execute orders on 
XLE. The volume tiers are based on the monthly shares executed per XLE Participant 
Organization; for Tier 1 (less than or equal to 10 million shares executed), the Exchange 
proposes to assess a fee of $0.003 per share executed to remove liquidity and give a credit of 
$0.002 per share executed for providing liquidity; for Tier 2 (greater than 10 million and less 
than or equal to 50 million shares executed), the Exchange proposes to assess a fee of $0.0028 
per share executed to remove liquidity and give a credit of $0.0025 per share executed for 
providing liquidity; for Tier 3 (greater than 50 million and less than or equal to 200 million 
shares executed), the Exchange proposes to assess a fee of $0.0027 per share executed to remove 
liquidity and give a credit of $0.0026 per share executed for providing liquidity; and for Tier 4 
(greater than 200 million shares executed), the Exchange proposes to assess a fee of $0.0026 per 
share executed to remove liquidity and give a credit of $0.0026 per share executed for providing 
liquidity.  For each of the four volume tiers described above, the Exchange proposes to charge a 
flat routing fee of $0.0036 per share executed when an order is routed via XLE to an away 
trading center and executed on that away trading center. 
volume tier.  Once a specific tier has been reached in a month, all transactions for that month will 
be subject to the fee that corresponds with that volume tier.  See also infra notes 15 and 16. 
4 
In addition, in lieu of the above-referenced execution fees, the Exchange proposes to 
adopt a separate execution fee for securities executed on XLE at a per share price below $1.00 
that remove liquidity.  For these securities, the Exchange would charge 0.1% (i.e., 10 basis 
points) of the total dollar value of the transaction.  The Exchange is not proposing an execution 
fee credit for providing liquidity for shares with a per share price below $1.00.  Such executed 
volume for securities trading below $1.00 will accrete towards the volume tier breakpoint per 
XLE Participant Organization. 
Additional transaction fees are set forth on the proposed fee schedule under the heading 
“Miscellaneous Transaction Fees.”  Miscellaneous Transaction Fees would be assessed in lieu of 
the general transaction fees described above.  The Exchange proposes to adopt an execution fee 
of $0.0023 per share per side for Immediate or Cancel (“IOC”) Cross Orders and Mid-Point 
Cross Orders entered over technology provided by Phlx.12 The Exchange is not proposing to 
adopt any transaction fees (i.e., execution fee for removing liquidity or execution credit for 
providing liquidity) for executions of IOC Cross Orders13 and Mid-Point Cross Orders14 with 
respect to orders entered over technology that is not provided by the Exchange.  There also 
would be no execution credit for any IOC Cross or Mid-Point Cross transactions, whether 
12 
Phlx intends to provide optional technology to XLE Participants for the entry of two-sided orders 
into XLE. 
13 
IOC Cross Orders are two-sided orders that match immediately and automatically on XLE the 
identified buy-side with the identified sell-side.  Specifically, an IOC Cross Order is a two-sided 
order that executes, in its entirety, at the specified price, provided that XLE will cancel an IOC 
Cross Order at the time of order entry under certain conditions.  See Phlx Rules 185(c) and 
185(c)(2). 
14 
A Mid-Point Cross Order is a two-sided order that executes, in its entirety, at the midpoint of the 
best Protected Bid and the best Protected Offer in a security. These orders will match 
immediately and automatically on XLE the identified buy-side with the identified sell-side.  See 
Phlx Rules 185(c) and 185(c)(1). 
5 
entered over technology provided by Phlx or not.15  In addition, in connection with IOC Cross 
Orders and Mid-Point Cross Orders entered over technology provided by Phlx, there would be a 
$50 maximum fee per trade side. 
The execution fee for Odd Lot Orders16 would be $0.003 per share executed, which 
applies to orders initially entered as Odd Lot Orders and executed in XLE.  There would be no 
execution credit for orders initially entered as Odd Lot Orders and executed on XLE. Also, for 
incoming NMS Linkage Orders or ITS Commitments routed to Phlx and executed on XLE, the 
Exchange proposes to charge $0.003 per share for removing liquidity.17  The Exchange is 
proposing to delete from its Summary of Equity Charges the Outbound ITS fee and Net Inbound 
ITS Credit, since the Exchange will no longer assess an Outbound ITS fee or give a Net Inbound 
ITS Credit. 
Covered Sale Fee 
The Exchange will continue to charge a Covered Sale Fee.  Each member and member 
organization engaged in executing sale transactions on the Exchange or executing transactions, 
which were routed over the Intermarket Trading System or pursuant to the NMS Linkage Plan, 
15 
Executed volume for IOC Cross and Mid-Point Cross Orders, whether entered over technology 
provided by the Exchange or not, will accrete towards the volume tier breakpoint per XLE 
Participant Organization that is a party to the execution.   
16 
An Odd Lot Order means an order for less than a round lot, which is defined for purposes of XLE 
as a unit of trading that is 100 shares.  See Phlx Rules 1(w) and 1(gg).  Executed volume for 
orders initially entered as Odd Lot Orders and executed on XLE will accrete towards the volume 
tier breakpoint per XLE Participant Organization.  
17 
This fee will be assessed on the member organization sponsoring the NMS Linkage Order or ITS 
Commitment or, if there is no member organization sponsoring the NMS Linkage Order or ITS 
Commitment, on the exchange or the Participant in the National Association of Securities 
Dealers, Inc. Alternative Display Facility (“ADF Participant”) sending the ITS Commitment or 
NMS Linkage Order.  The arrangement to charge other exchanges or ADF Participants was part 
of separate proposed rule changes that were approved by the Commission.  See Securities 
Exchange Act Release Nos. 54548 (September 29, 2006), 71 FR 59159 (October 6, 2006) (SR-
Phlx-2006-58) and 54555 (October 2, 2006), 71 FR 59577 (October 10, 2006) (SR-Phlx-2006­
60). 
6 
on another exchange or on a Participant in NASD’s Alternative Display Facility during any 
computational period shall pay a Covered Sale Fee equal to (i) the Section 31 fee rate multiplied 
by (ii) the member’s aggregate dollar amount of covered sales.18 
System Fees 
The Exchange proposes to charge a monthly FIX19 Computer-to-Computer Interface  
(CTCI) Port Fee20 of $100.00 per port. At this time, however, the Exchange does not intend to 
charge for monthly Drop Copy Feeds,21 Monthly Phlx Systems,22 or Depth of Book Data 
Feeds.23 
Marketing Data Revenue Sharing 
In addition, the Exchange is proposing to adopt a quarterly market data revenue sharing 
program that would provide for 50% of gross market data revenue to be shared with the member 
organization responsible for providing the liquidity portion of the trade. Sponsored Participant 
trades will be credited to the applicable Sponsoring Member Organization.  Any market data 
revenue would be paid to the applicable member organization on a quarterly basis. 
18 
See Phlx Rule 607 and Securities Exchange Act Release No. 54555 (October 2, 2006), 71 FR 
59577 (October 10, 2006) (SR-Phlx-2006-60) (amending Phlx Rule 607). See also Partial 
Amendment No. 1, supra note 3 (making conforming edits to the Covered Sale Fee rule text to 
reflect the amended version of Phlx Rule 607).  A Sponsoring Member Organization is 
responsible for the Covered Sale Fees generated in connection with its Sponsored Participant’s 
sale transactions.   
19 
The Financial Information eXchange (“FIX”) Protocol is a messaging standard developed 
specifically for the real-time electronic exchange of securities transactions. 
20 
A port is defined as an Internet Protocol (“IP”) address assigned by the Exchange for connectivity 
to XLE. 
21 
The Drop Copy Feed provides real-time information concerning trades executed by an XLE 
Participant Organization and will be provided on a subscription basis.  
22 
The Monthly Phlx Systems Fee refers to the use of optional Phlx technology to enter in two-sided 
orders and related clearing information. 
23 
The Depth of Book feed displays every order, except the undisplayed portion of a Reserve Order, 
within XLE at each price level and will be provided, on a subscription basis, at no charge to 
anyone who subscribes to receive this information. 
7 
The market data revenue sharing will apply to all securities: Tape A, Tape B, and Tape C. 
Although there is a difference in the manner in which the underlying Tape A and Tape B, 
revenue versus Tape C revenue is distributed to Phlx and the other national securities 
exchanges24 there is no difference in the manner in which member organizations will share in 
Tape A and B revenue versus Tape C revenue because the proposed rule language bases the 
credits on revenue attributable to the executions of a member organization.  Thus, a member 
organization responsible for providing the liquidity portion of the trade will receive 50% of the 
revenue attributable to its executions reported to each of the three tapes.25 
Deleting Obsolete Fees 
In connection with adopting the XLE fee schedule for the trading of equity securities on 
the Exchange, the Exchange proposes to delete the obsolete fees currently listed on the Summary 
of Equity Charges,26 which includes deleting references to license fees assessed in connection 
with the trading of certain products.  Although the Exchange may currently, or in the future, be a 
party to a license fee agreement with a licensor in connection with the trading of certain 
products, the Exchange does not propose to assess license fees in connection with XLE at this 
time.  The Exchange would submit a separate proposed rule change if it decides to assess license 
fees in the future.  
24 
Tape A and Tape B revenue is currently distributed to Phlx and national securities exchanges 
based on the number of trades reported, while Tape C revenue is distributed based on an average 
of number of trades and number of shares reported.   
25 
The Exchange states that the proposed market data revenue sharing program is similar to 
programs implemented by other self-regulatory organizations.  See, e.g., Securities Exchange Act 
Release No. 53860 (May 24, 2006), 71 FR 31250 (June 1, 2006) (SR-NSX-2006-07).  
26 
The Covered Sale Fee, however, will continue to be assessed in connection with XLE. 
8 
The Exchange also proposes to delete references to SCCP customer and specialist fees on 
the Exchange’s Nasdaq-100 Index Tracking StockSM Fee Schedule27 to reflect changes that were 
proposed in a separate SCCP fee filing.28 
Appendix A 
Appendix A of the Exchange’s fee schedule contains general fees that are currently 
assessed on members, foreign currency options (“FCO”) participants, member organizations, or 
FCO participant organizations that are not transaction-based, such that many of the fees relate to 
gaining access to trading on the Exchange or being physically present on the trading floor.  As 
set forth below, the Exchange intends to adopt, modify, or delete, as appropriate, several fees to 
accommodate the trading of equity securities on XLE. 
The Exchange proposes to adopt permit fees related to the trading of equity securities on 
XLE. Currently, the Exchange assesses a permit fee to access trading on the Exchange.  Permit 
fees are assessed based on how each permit is used.  Specifically, the Exchange will charge an 
Order Flow Provider a permit fee of $200 per month to submit orders to XLE only and $300 per 
month to submit orders to more than one trading venue (i.e., XLE, foreign currency options 
trading floor, or options trading floor).  Members who are registered as Market Maker 
Authorized Traders29 will be charged $1,200 per month for the first permit and $1,000 per month 
27 
The Nasdaq-100®, Nasdaq-100 Index®, Nasdaq®, The Nasdaq Stock Market®, Nasdaq-100 
Shares,SM Nasdaq-100 Trust,SM Nasdaq-100 Index Tracking Stock,SM and QQQSM are trademarks 
or service marks of The Nasdaq Stock Market, Inc. (“Nasdaq”) and have been licensed for use for 
certain purposes by the Philadelphia Stock Exchange pursuant to a License Agreement with 
Nasdaq. The Nasdaq-100 Index® (the “Index”) is determined, composed and calculated by 
Nasdaq without regard to the Licensee, the Nasdaq-100 Trust,SM or the beneficial owners of 
Nasdaq-100 Shares.SM  Nasdaq has complete control and sole discretion in determining, 
comprising or calculating the Index or in modifying in any way its method for determining, 
comprising or calculating the Index in the future. 
28 
See SR-SCCP-2006-04. 
29 
The term “Market Maker Authorized Trader” means a Participant Authorized User who is a 
member and who performs market making activities pursuant to Phlx Rules 170 et. seq.  A 
9 
for each additional permit for members in the same member organization.  If a member 
organization only sponsors a Sponsored Participant and does not have any other trading 
functions, the permit holder associated with that member organization will be charged a permit 
fee of $1,200 per month and $1,000 per month for additional permits for members in the same 
member organization. 
The permit fees will be assessed consistent with current practices.  For example, any 
member who is associated with one or more member organizations and uses a permit in more 
than one category will pay the higher of the applicable fees each month for such permit.30  In 
addition, permits may not be transferred from one permit holder associated with one member 
organization to a permit holder associated with a different member organization, thus a Transfer 
Fee is inapplicable for permits relating to XLE trading.31 
Excess permit fees32 will continue to apply, but will be expanded to include XLE users.  
Therefore, permit holders may be designated as “excess” permit holders in cases where permit 
holders in the same organization, other than the permit holder who qualifies the member 
organization, are either: (1) not floor brokers, specialists, ROTs (including RSQTs and SQTs), 
Off-Floor Traders, Market Maker Authorized Traders, or an XLE Sponsoring Member 
Organization whose only function is to sponsor a Sponsored Participant; or (2) not associated 
with a member organization that meets the definition of an Order Flow Provider, which now 
Participant Authorized User means an individual authorized by a member organization or a  
Sponsored Participant to enter orders, on its behalf, on XLE.  See Phlx Rules 1(m) and 1(x).  
30 
See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 49157 (January 30, 2004), 69 FR 5883 (February 6, 
2004) (SR-Phlx-2004-02). 
31 
Permits, however, may be transferred within a member organization without incurring a Transfer 
Fee. See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 49157 (January 30, 2004), 69 FR 5883 (February 
6, 2004) (SR-Phlx-2004-02). 
32 
See Securities Exchange Act Release Nos. 49856 (June 15, 2004), 69 FR 34411 (June 21, 2004) 
(SR-Phlx-2004-32) and 53043 (December 29, 2005), 71 FR 959 (January 6, 2006) (SR-Phlx­
2005-72). 
10 
includes submitting orders to XLE.  The rate remains unchanged.  Thus, member organizations 
that have excess permit holders will continue to be assessed $200 for each “excess” permit. 
The Exchange also proposes to charge Sponsoring Member Organizations an application 
fee of $1,850.00 for each Sponsored Participant that it proposes to sponsor to help offset the 
costs associated with the processing of the application, including administrative costs associated 
with reviewing the application and creating the appropriate accounts.33 
The Account Fee also will continue to apply to member organizations that trade on XLE.  
Currently, the Exchange charges member organizations a monthly fee of $50.00 for each account 
beyond the number of permits billed to that member organization.34  Therefore, if a member 
organization sponsors a Sponsored Participant and establishes a new account, each account 
beyond the number of permits billed to that member organization would be subject to the $50.00 
fee. 
In addition, any equity floor-based fees, such as post and booth space fees, would no 
longer apply to members or member organizations due to the fact that there will no longer be a 
physical equity trading floor.35  The Exchange will not assess these equity floor-based fees for 
33 
This fee is the same amount as the Exchange’s current application ($350.00) and initiation fees 
($1,500) combined for members and member organizations. 
34 
Each account may have 22 suffixes or sub-accounts.  For example, account number 202 can 
actually be used as accounts 202-A, 202-B, etc.  There is no additional charge for suffixes 
assigned within the same account.  See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 53046 (January 3, 
2006), 71 FR 1459 (January 9, 2006) (SR-Phlx-2005-89). 
35 
Examples of these floor-based fees include trading post/booth space, controller space, floor 
facility, direct wire to the floor, telephone system line extension, trading floor personnel 
registration, computer equipment services, repairs or replacements, and computer relocation 
requests. These fees will remain on Appendix A to reflect that they will still be assessed on 
members, participants, and member or participant organizations on the options and/or foreign 
currency options trading floors. 
11 
any part of the month in which XLE is launched.36  These fees will remain on the fee schedule as 
applicable to the Exchange’s other trading floors. 
The Exchange proposes to delete from the fee schedule any fees applicable only to the 
equity trading floor, such as the stock execution machine registration fee, due to the fact that 
there will no longer be a physical equity trading floor.  Additionally, the Exchange proposes to 
delete all Remote Specialist fees,37 since Remote Specialists will not exist in XLE.  
Apart from the launch of XLE and merely to update the fee schedule, the Exchange also 
proposes to delete the “Equity, Option or FCO Transmission Charge” and the “FCO Pricing 
Tape” fees because the Exchange will no longer be providing these services.  Thus, a charge for 
these services will not be assessed. 
The Exchange also proposes to delete its Off-Floor Examinations Fee of $30.00 per 
month per off-floor trader and, in turn, amend its Examinations Fee.  The implementation of a 
tiered monthly Examinations Fee will replace the Off-Floor Examinations Fee.  Currently, the 
Exchange assesses a monthly fee of $30.00 per off-floor trader for off-floor traders associated 
with member organizations for whom the Exchange is the Designated Examining Authority 
(“DEA”).38  With the closing of the Exchange’s equity trading floor, traders that previously 
physically traded on the floor of the Exchange (and for whom the Exchange was the DEA for 
their member organization) will no longer be considered “on-floor traders,” but will now be 
36 
For example, if XLE is launched in mid-November, no equity floor-based fees from Appendix A 
will be assessed for the month of November. 
37 
Specifically, these fees include the Remote Specialist System Fee, Remote Specialist Security 
Routing Fee, Remote Specialist Telecommunications Installation Fee, Remote Specialist 
Telecommunications Fee, Remote Specialist Equipment Installation Fee, and Remote Specialist 
Equipment Rental Fee. 
38 
See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 53643 (April 13, 2006), 71 FR 20151 (April 19, 2006) 
(SR-Phlx-2006-23). 
12 
designated as “off-floor traders” and therefore would now fall under and be assessed the Off-
Floor Examinations Fee.39 
To address the unintended consequences that XLE would now cover additional traders 
that previously were not covered under the Off-Floor Examinations Fee, the Exchange is 
proposing to delete the Off-Floor Examinations Fee and adopt a tiered Examinations Fee based 
on the number of off-floor traders in a member organization.40  Specifically, a member 
organization will be assessed a monthly fee of $2,100 for one to ten off-floor traders; $2,600 for 
eleven to fifty off-floor traders; $5,000 for fifty-one to two hundred off-floor traders; and 
$12,500 for over two hundred off-floor traders in the same member organization.  The following 
member organizations will continue to be exempt from the Examinations Fee, consistent with 
current practice:  (1) inactive organizations;41 and (2) organizations operating through one or 
more Phlx trading venues that demonstrated that 25% or more of its revenue as reflected on the 
most recently submitted FOCUS Report or transactions as reflected on its purchase and sales 
blotter are derived from securities transactions on the Phlx.  The Exchange proposes to eliminate 
the following exemptions to clarify and simplify the application of the Examinations Fee: (1) the 
exemption category for member organizations for any month where they incur transaction or 
clearing fees charged directly by the Exchange or by its registered clearing subsidiary, provided 
39 
The Examinations Fee is applicable to member/participant organizations for whom the Exchange 
is the DEA, unless an exemption to the assessment of the Examinations Fee applies.  See, e.g., 
Securities Exchange Act Release Nos. 46392 (August 21, 2002), 67 FR 55294 (August 28, 2002) 
(SR-Phlx-2002-45) and 42562 (March 22, 2000), 65 FR 16445 (March 28, 2000) (SR-Phlx-00­
18). 
40 
For purposes of assessing the proposed tiered Examinations Fee, Sponsored Participants are not 
included in the calculation of the number of off-floor traders in a Sponsoring Member 
Organization. 
41 
In connection with amending the Examinations Fee as described above, the definition of an 
inactive organization is being modified slightly so that it will be defined as an organization that 
had no securities transaction revenue, as determined by FOCUS reports or other financial filings, 
as long as the organization continues to have no such revenue each month. 
13 
that the fees exceed the examination fee for that month and (2) the exemption for member 
organizations affiliated with a member organization exempt from the Examination Fee due to the 
exemption listed immediately above or the exemption if that member organization is affiliated 
with a member organization operating from the Phlx trading floor or as a Remote Specialist 
which have demonstrated that at least 25 % or more of their income as reflected on the most 
recently submitted FOCUS Report was derived from floor activities or remote specialist 
activities. 
The proposed revised Examinations Fee, which would apply to many of the members 
currently covered by the Off-Floor Examinations Fee, should more efficiently and effectively 
assess member organizations for recovery of regulatory-related costs related to conducting 
examinations and should clarify how the Examinations Fee will be assessed in connection with 
the member organizations that trade equity securities on XLE.42 
Finally, the Exchange proposes to renumber the footnotes on the Exchange’s fee schedule 
to reflect the changes described above. 
2. 
Statutory Basis 
The Phlx believes that the proposed rule change to amend its schedule of fees is 
consistent with Section 6(b) of the Act,43 in general, and furthers the objectives of Section 
6(b)(4) of the Act,44 in particular, in that it is designed to assure the equitable allocation of 
reasonable fees and other charges among its members and other persons using its facilities.   
42 
The proposed Examinations Fee would be implemented the first full month after XLE is 
launched. For example, if XLE is launched in mid-November, the current off-floor Examinations 
Fee will apply for the month of November and the Examinations Fee set forth in this proposal 
would be assessed beginning with the month of December. 
43 
15 U.S.C. 78f(b). 
44 
15 U.S.C. 78f(b)(4). 
14 
B.  
Self-Regulatory Organization’s Statement on Burden on Competition 
The Phlx does not believe that the proposed rule change will impose any burden on 
competition that is not necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the purposes of the Act. 
C. 
 Self-Regulatory Organization’s Statement on Comments on the 
Proposed Rule Change Received from Members, Participants or Others 
No written comments were solicited or received with respect to the proposed rule change. 
III. 
Date of Effectiveness of the Proposed Rule Change and Timing for Commission 
Action 
The foregoing rule change has become effective pursuant to Section 19(b)(3)(A) of the 
Act45 and subparagraph (f)(2) of Rule 19b-4 thereunder,46 since it establishes or changes a due, 
fee or other charge imposed by the Exchange. 
At any time within 60 days of the filing of such proposed rule change, the Commission 
may summarily abrogate such rule change if it appears to the Commission that such action is 
necessary of appropriate in the public interest, for the protection of investors, or otherwise in the 
furtherance of the purposes of the Act.47 
IV. 
Solicitation of Comments 
Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and arguments concerning 
the foregoing, including whether the proposed rule change is consistent with the Act.  Comments 
may be submitted by any of the following methods:  
45 
15 U.S.C. 78s(b)(3)(A). 
46 
17 CFR 240.19b-4(f)(2). 
47 
The effective date of the original proposed rule change is November 2, 2006 and the effective 
date of Amendment No. 1 is December 12, 2006.  For purposes of calculating the 60-day period 
within which the Commission may summarily abrogate the proposed rule change under Section 
19(b)(3)(C) of the Act, the Commission considers the period to commence on December 12, 2006 
the date on which Phlx filed Amendment No. 1.  See 15 U.S.C. 78s(b)(3)(C). 
15 
Electronic Comments: 
• Use the Commission’s Internet comment form (http://www.sec.gov/rules/sro.shtml); or 
• Send an e-mail to rule-comments@sec.gov. Please include File Number SR-Phlx-2006­
70 on the subject line. 
Paper Comments: 
• Send paper comments in triplicate to Nancy M. Morris, Secretary, Securities and 
Exchange Commission, 100 F Street, NE, Washington DC 20549–1090. 
All submissions should refer to File Number SR-Phlx-2006-70.  This file number should be 
included on the subject line if e-mail is used. To help the Commission process and review your 
comments more efficiently, please use only one method.  The Commission will post all 
comments on the Commission’s Internet Web site (http://www.sec.gov/rules/sro.shtml). Copies 
of the submission, all subsequent amendments, all written statements with respect to the 
proposed rule change that are filed with the Commission, and all written communications 
relating to the proposed rule change between the Commission and any person, other than those 
that may be withheld from the public in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552, will be 
available for inspection and copying in the Commission’s Public Reference Room.  Copies of 
such filing also will be available for inspection and copying at the principal office of the Phlx.  
All comments received will be posted without change; the Commission does not edit personal 
identifying information from submissions.  You should submit only information that you wish to  
16 
make available publicly.  All submissions should refer to File No. SR-Phlx-2006-70 and should 
be submitted on or before [insert date 21 days from date of publication in the Federal Register]. 
For the Commission, by the Division of Market Regulation, pursuant to delegated 
authority.48
 
 
 
 
 
 
Florence
 
E.
 
Harmon
 
Deputy Secretary 
48 
17 CFR 200.30-3(a)(12). 
17 
