Lowering Health Care Cost Growth to Get More Value for Consumers | The White House
Get Email Updates
 
Contact Us
Home • The White House Blog
Search WhiteHouse.gov
 
The White House Blog
Subscribe
Our Top
Stories
Infographic: Exporting the
Boeing Dreamliner
President Obama Discusses
Insourcing at Master Lock
President Obama's 2013 Budget
is a Blueprint for an America
Built to Last
Helping Americans with Pre-
Existing Conditions Get Needed
Care
Health Care
WHITEHOUSE.GOV IN YOUR INBOX
Lowering Health Care Cost Growth to Get More Value for
Consumers
Sign up for health care updates
Your Email Address
Today, we got some good news when the official statistics for health care spending were
released. The new statistics from the Office of the Actuary at the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services show that health care spending growth in 2009 and 2010 decreased to record
lows.
Nancy-Ann DeParle
January 09, 2012 
04:00 PM EST
PHOTOS OF THE DAY
Share This Post
 
 
 VIEW PHOTO GALLERIES
JUMP TO:
A Specific Month
A Specific Month
http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2012/01/09/lowering-health-care-cost-growth-get-more-value-consumers[2/28/2012 6:20:50 PM]
Lowering Health Care Cost Growth to Get More Value for Consumers | The White House
Other White House Blogs
Other White House Blogs
The Affordable Care Act was signed into law by President Obama on March 23, 2010. These
numbers do not take into account all of the cost saving provisions in the Affordable Care Act that
are still being implemented. But they do show why the Affordable Care Act is so important. And
we’re confident the law will continue to help hold down cost growth in the years ahead. Here are
some important facts to remember if you’re looking at the new stats:
The analysis shows that we need the kind of policies included in the Affordable
Care Act to keep insurance companies in check. In 2010, the net cost of
health insurance – which includes the overhead and insurance company
profits – increased by 8.4 percent. That’s more than twice the increase in the
cost of health care and represents $11.3 billion more than was spent on
insurance overhead in 2009. But starting in 2011, insurance companies are
required to publicly disclose and justify any premium increases larger than 10
percent. Many states have the authority to reject unreasonable premium
increases and the Affordable Care Act gives states $250 million to strengthen
their rate review programs. Additionally, insurers are required to spend at least
80 percent of your premium dollars on health care expenses instead of
overhead and profits. Insurers that do not meet that standard must pay rebates
to their customers. 
The report released today found no spike in health care costs due to health
reform. Of a total increase of 3.9% in national health spending, less than 0.1%
was related to the law’s first-year provisions, such as the $250 in assistance to
nearly 4 million Medicare beneficiaries who hit the Medicare prescription drug
“donut hole.” And this modest increase will be offset over time. The Medicare
Trustees project that the Affordable Care Act savings to Medicare will more
than cover these initial costs while extending the life of the Medicare Trust
Fund. Moreover, the important Patient’s Bill of Rights protections – such as
policies that ensure preventive service coverage and certain choice of doctors
and end lifetime dollar limits on coverage and pre-existing condition exclusions
for children – did not have a measurable effect on health spending. 
The analysis also suggests that health care cost growth can be kept down.
The report noted: “U.S. health spending grew more slowly in 2009 and 2010 –
at rates of 3.8 percent and 3.9 percent, respectively – than in any other years
during the fifty-one year history of the National Health Expenditures Accounts.”
The Affordable Care Act includes numerous policies to continue this slow
growth. By fighting fraud, better coordinating care, preventing disease and
illness before they happen and creating a new state-based insurance
marketplace, we are helping to keep health care cost growth low. And experts
agree these policies will work. Dr. Mark McClellan, President Bush’s pick to
run Medicare recently said, “These reforms really have the potential for a
http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2012/01/09/lowering-health-care-cost-growth-get-more-value-consumers[2/28/2012 6:20:50 PM]
Lowering Health Care Cost Growth to Get More Value for Consumers | The White House
longer term impact on healthcare costs.”
 Early evidence from 2011 and 2012 suggest that these policies are beginning
to take hold. Medicare spending growth in 2011 was even slower than in
2010. On September 20th, 2011, Mercer, a well-known independent benefits
consulting firm released a survey of employers showing that their health
insurance cost increases will average 5.4 percent for 2012, the smallest
increase it has measured since 1997. States are reporting that very few
insurers are proposing double-digit rate increases for 2012. In fact, some are
providing rebates and premiums lower in 2012 than they were in 2011.
Keeping health care costs down will take work. We will continue to test and adopt best practices
that lower costs and improve quality through the Affordable Care Act’s Innovation Center. We will
increase transparency and accountability in the insurance industry this year through the
implementation of simple summaries of coverage and benefits by insurers, improved notices on
the 80 / 20 medical loss ratio, and State-specific thresholds for rate review. And we will step up
our work with States to create Affordable Insurance Exchanges, competitive private insurance
marketplaces. But thanks to the Affordable Care Act, we’re keeping costs down and making
health care more affordable.
Nancy-Ann DeParle is the Assistant to the President and Deputy Chief of Staff 
Related Topics: Economy, Health Care
PREVIOUS POST
NEXT POST
The Dallas Mavericks at the White
House
A Resurgent America on Display at the
2012 Detroit Auto Show
Featured Content
We Can't Wait
Job Resources for Returning Heroes
End of the Iraq War
 
Home
Briefing Room
Issues
The Administration
About the White House
Our Government
Your Weekly Address
Civil Rights
President Barack Obama
Interactive Tour
The Executive Branch
The White House Blog
Speeches & Remarks
Defense
Vice President Joe Biden
History
The Legislative Branch
Photos & Videos
Press Briefings
Disabilities
First Lady Michelle Obama
Presidents
The Judicial Branch
Photo Galleries
Statements & Releases
Economy
Dr. Jill Biden
First Ladies
The Constitution
Video
White House Schedule
Education
The Cabinet
The Oval Office
Federal Agencies &
Commissions
Live Streams
Presidential Actions
Energy & Environment
White House Staff
The Vice President's
Residence & Office
Elections & Voting
Podcasts
Legislation
Ethics
Executive Office of the
President
State & Local Government
Family
Eisenhower Executive
Office Building
Nominations &
Appointments
Other Advisory Boards
Resources
Fiscal Responsibility
Camp David
Disclosures
Foreign Policy
Air Force One
Health Care
White House Fellows
Homeland Security
White House Internships
Immigration
Tours & Events
Poverty
Inside the White House
Rural
http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2012/01/09/lowering-health-care-cost-growth-get-more-value-consumers[2/28/2012 6:20:50 PM]
Lowering Health Care Cost Growth to Get More Value for Consumers | The White House
Seniors & Social Security
Service
Taxes
Technology
Urban Policy
Veterans
Women
Additional Issues
 
En español
 Accessibility
 Copyright Information
 Privacy Policy
 Contact
USA.gov
 Subscribe to RSS Feeds
 Apply for a Job
http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2012/01/09/lowering-health-care-cost-growth-get-more-value-consumers[2/28/2012 6:20:50 PM]
