APPROVED 
 
 
WASHINGTON STATE INVESTMENT BOARD 
Public Markets Committee Meeting Minutes 
February 3, 2009 
 
The Public Markets Committee met in open public session at 1:00 p.m. at the Washington State 
Investment Board (WSIB) office at 2100 Evergreen Park Drive Southwest, Olympia, 
Washington. 
 
Members Present: 
Mike Ragan, Chair 
 
George Masten 
 
David Nierenberg (via teleconference) 
 
Mason Petit  
 
Judy Schurke  
 
 
Members Absent: 
Charlie Kaminski 
 
John Magnuson  
 
Robert Nakahara 
 
Representative Sharon Tomiko Santos 
 
Others Present: 
Joe Dear, Executive Director 
Gary Bruebaker, Chief Investment Officer     
 
Philip Paroian, Senior Investment Officer – Public Equity 
David Thatcher, Investment Officer – Public Equity 
John Lynch, Contracts Manager 
Kristi Bromley, Administrative Assistant – Investments  
Steve Dietrich, Assistant Attorney General 
 
Paul Brakke, State Street Global Advisors 
Lynn Blake, State Street Global Advisors 
Tom Motley, State Street Global Advisors 
Neil Tremblay, State Street Global Advisors 
 
[Names of other individuals attending the meeting are not included in the minutes but are listed 
in the permanent record.] 
 
The meeting convened at 1:00 p.m. with Chair Ragan identifying members present. 
 
Public Markets Committee 
1 
February 3, 2009 
APPROVED 
REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF MINUTES – DECEMBER 2, 2008 
 
Mr. Masten moved to adopt the December 2, 2008, Public Markets 
Committee minutes.  Mr. Petit seconded, and the motion carried 
unanimously.   
 
INDEX-RELATED PRODUCTS MANAGER PRESENTATION  
Mr. Thatcher introduced himself and reviewed the process and results of the index-related 
products search.  The current non-U.S. index contract with State Street Global Advisors (SSgA) 
expires March 31, 2009.  Many of the WSIB programs use passive indexing, including defined 
benefit and defined contribution programs as well as qualified and nonqualified portfolios.  
Indexing is used to gain broad based equity exposure at the lowest possible cost.  Callan 
Associates assisted WSIB staff with this search.  The search process was similar to the one 
conducted for U.S. indexes in 2007 to provide the WSIB with access to all index-related 
products offered by the firm.  The primary focus will be non-U.S. equity products.  Because of 
its size, the WSIB requires significant capacity from any index-related manager.   
 
Only two investment firms met the minimum requirements of the search: SSgA and Barclays 
Global Investors (BGI).  Both firms exhibited strengths and advantages and scored well during 
the evaluation; neither had major weaknesses.  While both firms are very competent managers 
of index products, three main factors contributed to the staff’s recommendation of SSgA over 
BGI:  (1) Incumbency—as the incumbent, SSgA has served the WSIB in this role for the past 
13 years.  Securities lending is imbedded into the index process and, because of the liquidity 
and volatility challenges in the current market, changing from one index provider and securities 
lending pool to another may cause significant turmoil and cost to the defined benefit portfolio as 
well as Plan 3 and DCP participants.  (2) Diversification—the WSIB benefits from having two 
separate and different index providers.  This also limits some operational and investment risks 
by not concentrating all passive mandates with one firm.  (3) Performance—SSgA’s 
performance record has been good and they have added between 20 and 40 basis points 
annualized over various time periods.  There is no compelling reason to transition from SSgA 
and staff’s recommendation is to award the new contract to them as the incumbent non-U.S. 
index manager. 
 
Mr. Thatcher addressed the recent media attention that SSgA’s parent company, State Street 
Corporation (SSC), has received regarding their recent fourth quarter 2008 announcement of a 
71 percent drop in profits and discussed steps that have been taken to assure that the WSIB’s 
holdings with SSgA are not affected by any potential credit rating downgrade of the parent 
company.  Mr. Thatcher also reviewed the differences between investing in a commingled fund 
versus separate account.  Investing in commingled funds for non-U.S. equity is preferred as they 
offer an easy platform for large-scale investments into many international markets, low cost 
access and economies of scale, low cost trading opportunities, and lower management fees and 
administration costs.  He also discussed the additional characteristics of commingled funds 
wherein the manager votes the proxies and exercises any class action litigation rights as well as 
the role of securities lending in the investment management of index funds. 
 
Public Markets Committee 
2 
February 3, 2009 
APPROVED 
Discussion ensued regarding benchmarks, securities lending, and proxy voting.  The Committee 
also discussed further due diligence to ensure that losses at a company’s parent organization 
would not prevent WSIB from having access to our funds and or impair the safety of the 
WSIB’s assets under all foreseeable circumstances. 
 
Mr. Brakke, Ms. Blake, Mr. Tremblay, and Mr. Motley introduced themselves.  Mr. Tremblay 
provided an organizational overview and discussed recent market challenges and the effect on 
SSC.  SSgA is one of the three core businesses of SSC.  Mr. Tremblay reviewed assets under 
management and steps SSC and SSgA have taken in response to the current market 
environment.  There has been no personnel turnover associated with any of the accounts SSgA 
manages on the WSIB’s behalf and the parent company continues to reinvest resources in SSgA 
in order to better serve client needs. 
 
Mr. Brakke reviewed the global structured products group and strategies.  Indexing is a core 
business for SSgA and a significant part of their total revenue.  He reviewed the team, 
organizational structure, strategies, and assets under management by strategy. 
Ms. Blake reviewed SSgA’s non-U.S. index experience including separate country funds, diverse 
client base, results, and assets under management.  She provided an overview of various SSgA 
non-U.S. index strategies including index structure and methodology as well as portfolio 
construction and performance. 
 
Mr. Motley discussed securities lending and provided an overview of SSgA’s cash management 
by security type and asset backed securities allocation.  He reviewed SSgA’s cash collateral 
investment management objectives, process, and philosophy and discussed current challenges 
and opportunities.  Mr. Motley reviewed the summary characteristics of SSgA’s securities 
lending funds.   
 
Discussion ensued regarding the uncertainty of recent market events, deterioration of the global 
economy, U.S. unemployment expectations and tie in with asset backed securities, depth of 
recession, and unintended consequences from government intervention. 
 
Mr. Masten moved that the Public Markets Committee recommend 
the Board approve the selection of State Street Global Advisors as an 
index-related products investment manager for the WSIB, with a 
focus on non-U.S. index-related products, subject to final negotiations 
of terms, conditions, and fees.  Mr. Petit seconded the motion.  
 
The Committee and staff discussed appropriate safeguards surrounding protection of fund assets.  
It was agreed that as part of the “final negotiations of terms,” WSIB staff from investments and 
contracts would work with legal counsel from the Attorney General’s office and outside counsel 
if necessary to ensure that the contract contains appropriate wording to protect the fund’s assets. 
 
The motion carried unanimously. 
 
[The Committee recessed at 2:22 p.m. and reconvened at 2:32 p.m.] 
 
Public Markets Committee 
3 
February 3, 2009 
APPROVED 
Chair Ragan announced that the Committee would go into executive session to discuss financial 
and commercial information relating to an investment since public knowledge regarding the 
discussion would result in loss to the funds managed by the WSIB or would result in private loss 
to the providers of the information.  The executive session was expected to last approximately 
30 minutes at which time the Committee would reconvene in open public session. 
 
ENHANCED INDEXING PROGRAM REVIEW 
[The committee entered executive session at 2:32 p.m.] 
 
[Mr. Nierenberg was no longer in attendance at 3:00 p.m.] 
 
[The committee reconvened in open public session at 3:34 p.m.] 
 
Mr. Petit moved that the Public Markets Committee recommend the 
Board approve the specific actions related to the U.S. equity enhanced 
index mandate within the Public Equity program discussed in 
executive session.  Mr. Masten seconded, and the motion carried 
unanimously. 
 
Ms. Schurke moved that the Public Markets Committee recommend 
the Board approve the specific actions recommended by the staff 
related to the non-U.S. equity enhanced index mandate within the 
Public Equity program discussed in executive session.  Chair Ragan 
seconded, and the motion failed with Mr. Masten and Mr. Petit voting 
no. 
 
Mr. Petit moved that the Public Markets Committee recommend the 
Board direct staff to execute the transition plan as recommended by 
the staff in executive session.  Mr. Masten seconded, and the motion 
carried unanimously. 
 
Mr. Petit moved that the Public Markets Committee recommend the 
Board direct staff to begin a competitive process to identify enhanced 
index managers for the Committee’s and Board’s consideration.  
Ms. Schurke seconded and the motion carried with Mr. Masten voting 
no.   
 
OTHER ITEMS 
There was no further business to come before the Public Markets Committee and the meeting 
adjourned at 3:38 p.m. 
 
 
Public Markets Committee 
4 
February 3, 2009 
