Y-12 and Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Medical Surveillance Program
Phase I: Needs Assessment
Queens College, City University of New York
Atomic Trades & Labor Council
PACE International Union
Creative Pollution Solutions, Inc.
February 12, 2004
Work performed under DOE Contract No. DE-FCO3-96SF21260
1-12 and Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Medical Surveillance Program
Phase I: Needs Assessment
Steven Markowitz, MD
Queens College, City University of New York
Carl Scarbrough
Atomic Trades & Labor Council
Sylvia Kieding
PACE International Union
Mark Griffon, MS
Creative Pollution Solutions, Inc.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page Number
Executive Summary
Part I: OVERVIEW
Section I. Introduction
1
Section II. Methods
3
Section ifi. Principal Findings
6
Section IV. Need for Medical Surveillance and Risk Communication
19
Part H: METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
Section V. Exposure Assessment
V 1-58
Section VI. Focus Groups
VI 1-11
Section VII. Epidemiologic and Health Studies Review
VIE 1-11
Attachments and Appendices: Exposure Assessment
Attachment 1: Job Exposure Information Sheet
Attachment 2: Descriptive Building Report
Appendix Al: X-lO Risk Mapping Results
Appendix A2: Y-12 Risk Mapping Results
Appendix B1:Y-12 External Dose
Appendix B2:Y-12 Urinalysis Data
Appendix B3:X-1O External Dose
Appendix B4:X-1O Urinalysis Data
Appendix B5:X-1O In Vivo Data
Appendix Cl: Y-12 Job Titles
Appendix C2: X-lO Job Titles
Appendix C3: Y-12 and X-lO Department Names and Numbers
TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont.)
Attachments and Appendices: Exposure Assessment
Appendix C4: X-lO Department Names and Numbers and Division
Titles
Appendix C5: X-1O BuildingNames and Building Numbers
Appendix Dl: Y-12 H&S Report Air Sampling Summary
Appendix D2: Y-12 H&S Report Urine Data Summary
Appendix D3: X-lO Health Physics Report Urine Data Summary
Appendix D4: X-lO Health Physics Report Occurrence Data
Summary
Appendix El: X-lO Questionnaire Results Summary
Appendix E2: Y-12 Questionnaire Results Summary
Appendix F: External Dose Summary Results
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Purpose
We report the results and analysis of a one year needs assessment study
evaluating whether a medical monitoring and risk communication program is justified for former
and current workers at the Y-12 and Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).
Methods
To complete this study, we used available exposure assessment data from paper
records and electronic databases and reviewed all studies that have been completed at the plants.
We also gathered "expert" former and current workers to conduct risk mapping sessions and
focus groups to obtain in-depth information about the plants. We collected and analyzed
responses to a questionnaire that was sent to a stratified random sample of 500 former Y-12 and
ORNL workers. We obtained employee rosters and basic employment data, to the extent
available, from the contractors and other institutions.
Findings
Former and current Y-12 and ORNL workers have had significant exposure to
pulmonary toxins (nickel, asbestos, beryllium, and acids), carcinogens (external and internal
radiation, asbestos, beryllium, and cadmium), renal toxins (chlorinated solvents and lead),
neurotoxins (mercury, solvents and lead), hepatotoxins (carbon tetrachloride and other solvents)
and noise. Epidemiologic studies at Y-12 and ORNL show excess rates of selected diseases,
including cancer and selected neurologic effects. Workers are concerned about the effects of
previous exposures on their health and are very interested in a medical screening and education
program. Former workers have good access to health care and engage in periodic health
examinations. However, most do not believe that their primary care providers know much about
the exposures that they had at Y-12 and ORNL. The focus groups and questionnaire responses
also provided useful guidance about how to establish effective risk communication and medical
surveillance programs.
The target population for a medical screening program among former and current
Y-12 and ORNL workers is conservatively estimated to range from 12,000 to 20,000. This range
requires refinement, but the roster with names and addresses that would allow initiation of
screening is currently available.
Conclusion
The findings of this needs assessment study support a targeted medical and
cancer surveillance and education program. This conclusion is based on 1) the evidence that
large numbers of workers have had significant exposures to detrimental agents, 2) the
demonstration among Y-12 and ORNL workers of excess risk of cancer, selected neurologic
effects and beryllium-related outcomes in epidemiologic studies, and 3) the need and desire
expressed by former and current workers for a credible targeted program of medical surveillance
and education. A health protection and risk communication program should center on workers at
risk for 1) cancer, 2) chronic respiratory disease, including chronic obstructive lung disease and
the pneumoconioses, 3) kidney, liver and neurologic disease, and 4) hearing loss. These
conditions are amenable to early intervention, amelioration, and/or primary prevention. A risk
communication delivered by a credible source will reduce uncertainty and distrust. After
participation in the proposed screening program, former and current Y- 12 and ORNL workers
will have increased real knowledge about their personal health status, what is known about their
risks, and how they can promote their own health. We believe that mounting such a program in
Phase II will make a tangible contribution to the health of former and current Y- 12 and ORNL
workers.
PART I: OVERVIEW
I INTRODUCTION
In January 2003, a consortium led by the Queens College of the City University of New
York, the Atomic Trades & Labor Council, the Paper Allied-Industrial Chemical and Energy
(PACE) Workers International Union, and CPS, Inc. initiated a needs assessment study to
evaluate whether former Department of Energy (DOE) workers at the Y-12 and Oak Ridge
National Laboratory (ORNL) would benefit from the establishment of a program of medical
surveillance under Section 3162 of the 1993 Defense Re-Authorization Act. This assessment was
conducted under a contract from and with the guidance of the Department of Energy The needs
assessment at the Y-12 and ORNL facilities benefited from the experience that PACE, Queens
College, and CPS, Inc. gained by conducted similar needs assessments at the three DOE gaseous
diffusion plants in 1996-1997 and at INEEL in 1998, and by the conduct of medical surveillance
by this consortium at these four facilities from 1997 to the present.
To conduct this needs assessment, the Queens College/ATLCIPACE/CPS, Inc.
consortium identified the need for four domains of information. These include:
•
Exposure characterization for the workforce at Y- 12 and ORNL
•
Epidemiologic and other health studies, to the extent available
• Educational and health care needs and expressed interest in medical
surveillance program
• Demographic profile of target population
These domains corréspoñd to the criteria established by the DOE in its document, Guidance for
Phase I Reports and Phase II Applications.
Through a focused 12 month effort organized in these domains, we have addressed the
specific issues raised by the Department of Energy in determining whether a medical surveillance
program is needed and would benefit the targeted populations. These specific issues include
characterizing the type and degree of relevant detrimental exposures; defining essential health
impacts; defining the size of the target populations, and finally, documenting the need for
establishing a program that will combine medical monitoring with risk communication.
To provide answers to these questions was an ambitious task. Y-12 and ORNL are large
complex facilities that have been in operation and evolution for 60 years. Much of the current
work at Y-12 is classified. Information on exposures, both radiologic and chemical, are diverse
and inexactly related to known information on health outcomes in the Y-12 and ORNL
workforces. The limited period of the needs assessment required that we use secondary data
sources and published studies. Nonetheless, given the goals of the expected medical surveillance
program, sufficient information was available to allow a description of the rationale for such
screening and to provide the information that is needed to conduct such medical surveillance.
The study team had the great advantage of having excellent access to and high credibility
with many members of the workforce that have operated and continue to operate Y-12 and ORNL
and excellent cooperation of the DOE, NNSA, and BWXT personnel at the sites. The needs
assessment has also benefited from previous in-depth epidemiologic and exposure assessment
studies. Our challenge during the past 12 months has been to combine current study-based
knowledge of these sites with the collective knowledge possessed by the Y-12 and ORNL
1
workforce in order to gain a sufficient understanding of cumulative exposures at these facilities
and how they might impact current health This report provides a snapshot of this combined
knowledge. It is anticipated that understanding how exposures impact workers' health at these
facilities will be an ongoing task during the medical surveillance phase.
Throughout the needs assessment process, the Queens College/ATLC/PACE/CPS
consortium has abided by a central principle of the project: to maximize involvement of workers
and scientists from Y-12 and ORNL in all aspects of the conduct of the needs assessment process
and the planning of the medical surveillance and risk communication program. We have used
this method for several essential reasons. The most obvious is that the workforce of these
facilities represents an excellent source of information for identifying the hazards that have
existed at Y-12 and ORNL over the past 60 years. This knowledge complements and vivifies the
knowledge that we have gained from the many reports and studies that have been conducted at
these facilities over the past decades. Second, the study consortium understands that the
effectiveness of a program planning process will be enormously enhanced if all participants in the
program are involved. Finally, health protection, the ultimate goal of the DOE Worker Medical
Surveillance Program, requires workers acting on their own behalf. Beginning to overcome the
many years of uncertainty, distrust and ignorance that some workers at DOE facilities have
requires an open and participatory process from the inception of a medical surveillance program.
This report does not contain an exhaustive list of all of the medical needs that workers at
Y-12 and ORNL might have as a result of their occupational exposures. Creating such a
complete inventory of all health risks that Y-12 and ORNL workers have or might have was
beyond the
scope,
the mandate and the resources available to the Queens
___
College/ATLCIPACE/CPSconsortium in the past 12 months. We recognize that the DOE former
worker medical surveillance program is limited in nature and will have limited resources over the
next several years.
Hence, we concentrated on exposures and possible health outcomes that best meet the
criteria that DOE has established for this program as reflected in Section 3162 that created the
program. Specifically, we have attempted to identify significant exposures, as supported by
available qualitative and quantitative data, that have or are likely to produce health impacts that
might be alleviated by early detection and/or by communication with the potentially affected
workers. There are likely to be other exposure-disease relationships of relevance to Y-12 and
ORNL workers that deserve the attention of the Department of Energy. This would include
possible health impacts that have not yet been fully investigated in the workforce; exposures for
which data are insufficient to allow judgment about the likelihood of their significance, health
impacts that had been demonstrated to exist but may or may not be occupational in etiology; and
health outcomes that are not amenable to screening or for which early detection does not lead to
fruitful intervention. Pursuing these possibilities, however important, was not part of the mandate
that we received from the Department of Energy. Nor could we take responsibility for following
up these potential occupational risks, given the limited time and resourcesavailable to us during
this 12 month needs assessment.
This report is organized into two parts to satisfy the competing goals of being succinct
and of being substantive. Part I (Introduction, Methods, and Principal Findings) is intended as an
overview in order to communicate the principal methods used and the results thereby obtained.
This overview distills the more detailed collections and summaries of data which are presented in
—
Part II (Sections 5 through 8). Section 5 provides details about the type and levels of exposures
experienced by former workers at Y-12 and ORNL as identified in available industrial hygiene
and health physics data and through risk-mapping sessions. Section 6 presents the results of focus
2
___
groups of former and current Y-12 and ORNL workers in assessing health concerns, evaluating
r
the level of knowledge and perceived risks and eliciting opinions about how to conduct a medical
surveillance program. Section 7 provides a summary of available epidemiologic studies that have
been conducted at Y-12 and ORNL. Section 8 provides the results of a questionnaire sent to 500
former Y-12 and ORNL workers to collect information on exposures and current health care.
Readers are encouraged to read Part II in detail to gain a full understanding of study methodology
and the types of information that underlie the summaries presented in Part I.
II. METHODOLOGY
We employed a number of methods of study during this 12 month needs assessment.
These methods were chosen based on the ability to obtain reliable data within a limited time
period, the desire to include rank and file workers in the data-gathering process, and the need to
acquire information that would allow us to plan the risk communication and health service
component of a medical surveillance program.
Descriptions included in this report that derive from project activities that address
exposures, work processes, and site activities have been reviewed and cleared by the DOE
security office in Oak Ridge. This includes the information that was collected through direct
discussions with Y-12 and ORNL workers during the risk mapping and focus groups.
A. Review of Existing Exposure Records
The primary focus of this component of the exposure assessment was to determine, to the
extent possible, the nature and intensity of major exposures as a function of building, area,
department, and/or job classification. Another primary need was to determine whether we could
establish an approach for linking the building, department and exposure data to individuals within
the worker cohort
A full listing of the major sources of health physics and industrial hygiene data that we
used from Y-12 and ORNL is provided in Section 5.
B. Risk mapping
Risk Mapping is an approach that has been used extensively at industrial facilities as a
tool to assist workers and/or joint health and safety committees in detennining high risk areas
within their facilities. Traditionally, the technique is used to identify current problem areas with a
facility and to assist in developing an intervention strategy for resolving the problem areas. CPS,
Inc. and PACE performed extensive risk mapping as part of the DOE-supported medical
surveillance program at the gaseous diffusion plants and INEEL. In the current project, CPS, Inc.
worked closely with ATLC, using the risk mapping approach to map past exposure conditions at
Y-12 and ORNL.
In addition to using the mapping process for locating past exposure conditions within the
buildings of interest, the method was modified to allow the field researchers to collect semi-
quantitative exposure data for each identified exposure of concern. Field researchers also
collected data regarding other building and process characteristics (i.e., description of major
processes, number of workers in the building of interest, and years of operation).
Several steps were necessary to develop the risk mapping activity at Y-12 and ORNL.
We customized the risk mapping method for use in retrospective exposure assessment. We used
3
the following tools, which we had previously developed at the DOE gaseous diffusion plants and
INEEL, for field use:
• Job Exposure Information Sheet to collect job/process/exposure information for each
chemical agent identified on the risk map.
• Building Characteristics Report Form to allow field researchers to collect descriptive
information on the buildings of interest over time (i.e., description of major process,
number of workers, and years of operation).
• Risk Mapping Training Guidebook to train the field researchers in the risk-mapping
technique.
The risk mapping study group, led by Mark Griffon of CPS, Inc., conducted a one day
train-the-trainer session for the field researchers. The field researchers included ATLC union
health and safety representatives, and an experienced PACE risk map leader from the
PACE/Queens College/CPS, Inc project participated as well.
"Experts" were then selected for the initial risk mapping session from each of the two
sites. The ATLC, CPS, mc, and PACE worked together to identify and to assemble an "expert"
team of former workers for the initial risk mapping sessions The "experts' selected for the initial
sessions consisted primarily of hourly workers with extensive experience at the sites. Several line
supervisors were also included in these sessions. "Experts" were not selected at random, but
based on their vast amount of site experience and the broad array of job classifications and
process buildings where they worked.
The initial risk mapping session focused on the entire Y-12 and ORNL facilities and was
conducted to assist in determining priority areas for future, more specific, risk mapping sessions.
As a product of this session, the expert group produced a list of primary facilities of highest
concern regarding retrospective exposures. This list, along with information obtained through
review of other monitoring data, was used to identify areas for subsequent risk mapping sessions.
The second round of risk-mapping sessions were conducted to learn more about the
priority buildings at each of the facilities that were identified in the initial session Information
was systematically collected utilizing the tools noted above, including the Job Exposure
Information Sheet and the Building Characteristics Report Form.
All of the information obtained for risk-mapping sessions was compiled into a database
to allow for assessment of the data.
To date, a total of 20 risk mapping sessions have been conducted These risk-mapping
activities have included approximately 60-70 retirees. In each session, an attempt was made to
obtain the participation of representatives from a variety of job titles who worked in the building
in question. We succeeded in that we were able to include representatives from supervision,
scientists/engineers, liPs, operators, and maintenance crafts.
The findings of the risk mapping sessions are summarized within Section ifi of Part I of
this report and the database report of the data collected from the individual sessions is included in
Section V. A breakdown of exposures by building is included within an appendix of Section V.
4
C. Focus groups
Focus groups of former workers were conducted in order to obtain in-depth information
about a variety of issues, including exposures, perceptions of risk, health concerns, health care,
and receptivity to a health screening program. The overall design, recruitment strategy, training,
and analysis were led by Sylvia Kieding of PACE International Union in consultation with Carl
Scarbrough, ATLC President, and health and safety representatives of ATLC. The actual
implementation of the focus groups was led by former or current workers from Y-12 and ORNL
with assistance of Tom Moser of PACE.
Established ATLC health and safety representatives at Y-12 and ORNL were recruited to
serve as moderators for the focus group sessions. They were trained using a Moderator Guide
specifically developed for this project (available upon request). To prepare, moderators
participated in a day long training seminar and role-play. Another OCAW member was recruited
and trained to serve as the scribe for each focus group session.
Two focus groups were held at Y-12 and ORNL on July 8 and August 5, 2003 (four in
total). A total of 33 people participated in the four focus groups. The sessions were held in a
secured room in the Y-12 Security Building. All participants received a participant information
sheet and signed informed consent forms that had been read aloud to the group before the session.
The sessions were audiotaped with the full knowledge and unanimous consent of participants.
All focus groups at both sites were comprised of "experts," both retirees and active
workers, who were selected by the local union officers and ATLC health and safety staff due to
their knowledge of the plant and familiarity with plant operations.
In a preliminary analysis of the transcripts of focus group sessions, an initial coding
scheme of important themes was developed. Ms. Kieding undertook a basic coding and sorting
of themes and provided illustrative quotes from the transcriptions. These are presented in detail
in Part II, Section 6 of this report.
D. Questionnaire Survey
In order to obtain exposure and limited health information from a broad cross-section of
the former workforce at Y- 12 and ORNL, a questionnaire was developed and sent to a random
sample of 500 retired and terminated Y-12 and ORNL workers. The base population from which
this sample was drawn includes a total of 7,118 workers, consisting of 3,891 Y-12 retirees and
3,227 ORNL retirees. This group of 7,118 workers represents the total number of living retirees
receiving a pension through BWXT. We randomly selected 250 employees from each facility to
obtain the total of 500. Note that the questionnaire was returned anonymously. We requested that
the responder's name not be written on the returned questionnaire to avoid any potential problems
with confidentiality.
A six page questionnaire was developed (Part II: Section VIII, Appendix A) that
requested information on demographic status; history of job title, exposures, and plants of
employment; health concerns; current health care; and interest in screening and education. A
check list of 63 specific exposures was included in the questionnaire for Y-12 and ORNL
employment separately. The questionnaire was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of
Oak Ridge Associated Universities and Queens College of the City University of New York. A
copy of the questionnaire was sent to the selected 500 individuals with a cover letter co-signed by
Carl Scarbrough, ATLC President; and Steven Markowitz, MD, project director. The
5
questionnaires were sent by first class U.S. mail in order that the letters with incorrect addresses
would be returned to the project office. We report here the findings from the returned completed
questionnaires
E. Review of Epidemiologic Studies
We obtained all published epidemiologic and health studies that are available for Y-12
and ORNL.
G. Demographic Profile of Target Population
Rosters of Y-12 and ORNL employees who currently receive pensions were obtained
from BWXT. Available data on these retirees include name, current address, home telephone
number, date of birth, date first employed by the company, and last date of employment.
III. PRINCIPAL FINDINGS
A. Hazards and Exposure Levels of Former Y-12 and ORNL Workers: Results of
Records Review and Risk-Mapping
For the purposes of planning a medical surveillance program, it is most useful to organize
the large numbers of diverse exposures encountered at the Y- 12 and ORNLfacilities by principal
human organ or organ systems affected. In cases where a health effect has been identified by job
operation (e g -welding) rather than by single exposure then job title or operation becomes the
tool used to organize health effects Employing this means of considering hazardous exposures
yields Table I-I.
Our knowledge about the magnitude of the exposures cited above derives from several
sources: external radiation monitoring, industrial hygiene data, risk mapping sessions, focus
groups, and questionnaire results. All of these methods have limitations, as detailed in Part II of
this report. A brief summary of data for the most important exposures is provided in the section:
the reader is urged to see the additional description in Part II.
6
Table I-I
Important Classes of Exposures at Y-12 and ORNL by Target Organ
Target Organ/Disease
Exposure Class
Important Examples
Lung
Chronic obstructive
lung disease
Irritants
Hydrofluoric acid
Hydrochloric acid
Sulfuric acid
Nitric acid
Cadmium
Welding fumes
Pneumoconioses
Fibrogenic dusts
Asbestos
Beryllium
Lung cancer
Carcinogens
Asbestos
Chromium
Welding
Radiation
Genitourinary system
Renal toxicity
Renal toxins
Lead
Chlorinated solvents
Endocrine
Thyroid cancer
Ionizing radiation
Ionizing radiation
Hematopoietic system
Leukemia
Ionizing radiation
Benzene
Ionizing radiation
Benzene
Nervous System
Cognitive dysfunction
Peripheral neuropathy
Nervous system toxins
Mercury
Lead
Chlorinated solvents
e.g.-trichloroethylene
Gastrointestinal system
Hepatitis
Hepatoxicity
Chlorinated Solvents
e.g.-carbon tetrachloride
Hearing
Noise
Noise
Cardiovascular system
Hypertension
Lead
A.1 Radiation
A.1.1 Monitoring Policies at the Facilities
Historically, the main purpose of the radiation monitoring programs was to assure that
each worker's exposure to radiation was kept below the current annual prescribed occupational
exposure limit. In view of this aim, data collection in the early years was very limited for workers
who were considered to have low potential for exposure. Also, at the time of this report, limited
7
information is available concerning the rationale used to decide which workers to monitor
implementation of these decisions, and the methods used for assessing reliability, variability, and
lower limits of detection. At each facility, the radiation safety personnel were responsible for the
monitoring program, making the programs essentially independent of each other.
Because internal monitoring programs were begun at ORNL in 1951 and at Y-12 in 1950,
the definition of "not monitored" varies by plant and by year. By the early 1950s, a worker who
was not monitored for internal exposure was judged to have low potential for exposure. Because
of policies in effect, external monitoring data are available for most workers from Y-12 only
beginning in 1961. ORNL began monitoring for external radiation in 1943 (Watkins, 1993).
A.1.2 External Radiation Exposure
Before November 1951, only those workers entering areas of potential external radiation
exposure were monitored for external dose. In 1947, all workers entering a radiation area more
than three times a week were assigned permanent film badges. By 1949, permanent film badges
were issued to all workers who entered these restricted areas at least once a week. In November
1951, all workers entering the main X- 10 area were required to have a film badge, and by
September 1953, the film badge and security badge needed for entry were combined into one
badge (Watkins, 1993). Risk mapping participants reported that they often worked using a self
reading dosimeter (SRD) and not wearing a film badge. They mentioned that the SRD readings
were recorded in HP logs but they were uncertain if this information was included in their
personal dose record. (Risk Mapping Interviews, 2003)
According to site records, X-10 only used daily SRDs from 1943 until about 1945. In
1945, they began to use weekly film badges and continued until the late 1950s, when they
changed to quarterly film badges. In 1975, they began to use either quarterly or annual TLDs. At
the Y-12 facility, they also started with SRDs, progressing to weekly film badges in 1950,
monthly film badges in 1959-1960, and quarterly film badges from 1960 until 1980. After 1980,
they used either quarterly or annual TLDs. From 1961-1974, badges used by workers in areas of
low potential exposure were not always read. Rather, a sample of the badges issued was read to
verify that the areas were being properly defined. For early film badges, the minimum detectable
dose was approximately 25 mrem. The sensitivity of film badges in later years was improved
(Watkins, 1993).
After extensive error checking procedures, annual external doses were calculated by
summing all credible gamma and neutron film badge readings taken during the year. Because of
the variability in dosimeter types, reading frequencies, and monitoring policies over time and
facilities, annual doses obtained from the simple summation of readings during the year may not
be comparable at all times, and a recorded dose may not always accurately represent the true
amount of a worker's radiation exposure. A summary of the recorded annual doses by year and by
department is included in Appendix F. This appendix contains a compilation of dose data from
three sources: H&S reports, CEDR CER data files, and CEDR Mortality study data files. The
mortality study data files included some extrapolation of doses for times when data were missing
and, therefore, the results are different than the other data sets. A summary of the external dose
data (annual doses greater than 500 mrem) versus department is included in Appendix B.
8
A.1.3 Internal Radiation Exposure
Film badges measure external exposure over a given period of time. In contrast,
monitoring for internal exposure is performed at specific points in time and, hence, yield results
that are estimates of the body or organ burden at the time of measurement. The primary methods
of internal monitoring used were urinalysis and in vivo gamma spectrometry, but fecal analysis
was also performed in some instances. The dosimetry associated with analysis of urine for
radioisotopes of concern depends on relating the amount of an isotope in a reference volume of
urine to the amount contained in the body or in specific organs. The relationship between these
two amounts is affected by many variables, such as the radioisotope, time since exposure, the
chemical and physical form of the isotope, and biological variation among individuals.
In general, workers were monitored only if they worked in locations or administrative
groups that were judged by supervisors or radiation safety organizations to have had potential for
internal exposure. Periodically after 1950, individual samples from usually unmonitored workers
were randomly selected and monitored by ORNL to confirm that such workers were indeed
unexposed to internal radiation The policy at Y-12 was to increase monitoring frequency as the
potential for internal exposure increased. (Watkins, 1993, Patterson, 1957, West, 1977)
Workers at TEC had a high potential for internal contamination due to the processes
performed at the facility. However, personal monitoring data were not available because no
bioassay or whole body counting programs were established during the years when it was in
operation.
A.1.4 Review of External and Internal Data from Databases and HP Reports
There is an increasing trend in external doses at ORNL until the late 1950s and a steady
decrease afterwards, while there is greater variability in the total recorded annual external doses
at Y-12. A Y-12 peak in 1958 was due to a criticality accident involving eight workers and did
not represent a general increase in external dose (Appendix F).
The percentage of individuals monitored for external exposures at X-10 remained at
about 85% to 90% from 1950-1985 while the percentage at Y-12 was at about 20% until 1960
when it was raised to 85% to 90%. Generally, the percentage of workers monitored for internal
exposures was between 20% and 40% each year with the highest percentages for both plants
occurring around 1963 to 1965.
A summary of the annual radiation dose ranges for the X-10 site is included in Appendix
F. It is interesting to note that in 1960 there is a sharp drop off in the number of individuals with
annual doses in excess of 2 rem and also a sharp increase in the number of individuals being
monitored.
A 1958 HP report indicated that, among the ten highest cumulative doses due to
penetrating radiation, nine individuals were from the Radioisotope Production Division. The
cumulative doses were received over 7 to 15 years and ranged from 42.5 — 64.8 rem. (Hart, 1958)
HP risk mapping participants thought that the worst areas for internal exposures were
Buildings 3038 3517 and 3019
9
Recorded external doses at Y-12 were generally lower than doses at X-10 The only
significant internal monitoring was uranium urinalysis and in vivo testing (uranium-235 and
thorium). Over the years it was assumed that monitoring for uranium would be satisfactory as a
surrogate measure of other contaminants in the uranium (i.e., transuranics, such as neptunium and
plutonium, or fission products in recycled fuel). Data were unavailable to determine whether
there were processes or areas where these transuranic materials may have concentrated and
therefore represented a greater potential hazard. Additionally, a recent report discussing the
cUrrent Y-12 internal dose program (Eckerman, 1999) stated that "following the recent re-start of
operations at the Y-12 Plant, the Radiological Control Organization (RCO) observed that
enriched uranium exposures appeared to involve insoluble rather than soluble uranium that
presumably characterized most earlier Y-12 operations." Based on this finding, the bioassay
program was modified, particularly specifying the need for routine fecal sampling. This raises
questions with regard to potential missed doses.
A.2 Beryllium
Data from the Y-12 Beryllium Worker Enhanced Medical Surveillance Program, funded
by DOE, indicated that the buildings associated with CBD cases or sensitized workers included:
Alpha-5, 9202, Butler Building, Beta-4, Beta-2, 9212, 9766, 9995 and 9998. (Bingham, 1997)
Additionally, a 1973 Y-12 document (DOE, 1973) identified Alpha-5, Alpha-3, 9202,
and 9995 as "Beryllium Control Areas." H&S summary reports from 1953-1960 indicate that
beryllium air sampling was frequently conducted in Building 9766 and, to a lesser extent, in
Building 9212 (Appendix D).
A broad-based approach to defining groups potentially exposed to beryllium is
recommended since published data demonstrate that individuals with low-level exposure can be
affected (Newman 1989, Kreiss 1996). For this reason, a two-tiered approach is recommended
based on exposure groups
A.3 Mercury
The mercury concentration in the workplace air was monitored frequently at the Y-12
facility. For example, in 1956, over 200,000 air mercury readings were taken (Appendix D). In
the 1955 cascade start-up, many readings of mercury concentrations in the workplace air were
higher than the 0.1 mg/rn3 then recommended. (The current recommended permissible exposure
level for mercury is 0.05 mg/rn3). A urinalysis program started in 1953 was expanded to provide
a check on the worker mercury exposures. During 1955 and into 1956, approximately 200 to 300
workers had readings that exceeded the recommended limit of 0.3 mg/liter of urine. When a
worker's urinary mercury remained elevated for several specimens the workers were re-assigned
Approximately 70 workers were involved in temporary re-assignments of this nature. In addition
to the air sampling and urine program, there was a special medical surveillance program
involving clinical examinations of mercury workers being performed every six months. Persons
with a history of albuminuria, kidney problems, or hypertension were screened out and not
allowed to work with mercury. (Mercury Task Force, 1983(a), 1983(b))
During the latter part of the Colex start-up during 1955, ABC and Y-12 management
undertook a crash program to bring the workplace mercury vapor levels down to acceptable
levels. Air sampling results seem to suggest that airborne concentrations were reduced after
1955, as indicated by the drop in the percentage of air samples in excess of the 0 1 mg/rn3 limit
(see Appendix D).
10
According to a 1977 report, Mercury Inventory at Y-12 Plant, 1950 through 1977, 2.4
million pounds of mercury at Y-12 had been 'lost' or 'unaccounted for' (Mercury Task Force,
1983(a), 1983(b)).
A Emory University study conducted in 2000 as a follow-up to University of Michigan
study of the mercury workers at Y-12 showed that 'neurological effects of relatively heavy
exposure were still detectable more than 30 years after cessation of that exposure'. The study
concluded that the exposure measure with the strongest association with the outcome was
cumulative exposure (cases were selected by cumulative exposure of � 2000 ug of Hg/liter-
quarter, or a one-time urine value of greater than 600 ug of Hg/liter). The department numbers
identified as "High Exposure Potential" in the Emory report included: 2025, 2026, 2681, 2682,
2683, 2685, and 2690. (Emory University)
Priority buildings (buildings where frequent sampling for mercury was conducted and/or
a high percentage of samples were identified in excess of the site MPC levels), based on company
III records (Appendix D), included: Beta-4, Alpha-2, 9202, Alpha-5 and Alpha-4. According to
a 1957 Health Physics Program Report (Y- 1186) (Patterson, 1957) "a routine mercury vapor
sampling program is maintained in Buildings 9201-2, 9201-4, 9201-5, 8 1-10, and 9204-2;
buildings in which a potentially serious mercury vapor problem may exist". During 1955
through 1956, the percentage of mercury urine samples which exceeded the MPC (0.3mg/mA3)
ranged from 10% to 30%. A further breakdown of these data indicates that machinists were
exposed to the highest levels while chemical operators were lower and electricians still lower.
The machinists reported concentrations ranged from 0.5 to 0.3 mg Hg/liter, the chemical
operators ranged from 0.46 to 0.3, and reported concentrations for electricians exposures ranged
from 0.12 to 0.2 ug Hg/liter (Mercury Task Force, 1983(a), 1983(b).)
At X-lO, Building 4501 housed the Orex pilot project, which was reported to have had a
lot of mercury during risk mapping sessions. Other uses of mercury at the X-10 site appear to be
on a smaller scale (instruments, labs, etc.). It should however, be pointed out that many X-10
workers began working at the Y-12 site (as X-10 employees) after the calutron operations were
shut down.
A.4 Caustics
Nitric acid and hydrofluoric acid were used extensively in isotope separation and
purification operations. Specifically, Buildings 3019, 9212, 9215, 3505, Alpha-5, 9203, 9206,
9929, and 9401-2 were involved in uranium or other isotope recovery, processing, separation or
purification. Steps within these processes involved many caustic materials including two of the
primary acids used, hydrofluoric acid and nitric acid (in some cases, fuming nitric acid).
H&S summary reports indicate that air sampling for lithium was conducted at the Y-12
site. Risk mapping participants mentioned that lithium at the site caused strong lung irritation and
sometimes frequent sneezing. Also, there were frequent skin bums from working with this
material.
Additionally, tetramethyl ammonium borohydrate (TMAB) was present at the Y-12 site
and is a strong irritant, similar in toxic properties to other boron compounds.
11
A.5 Solvents
Chlorinated solvents were used extensively at both the Y-12 and X-10 facilities over the
history of the sites. Generally, the use of carbon tetrachioride was only prevalent during the early
years of operation. TCE and perchioroethylene were used extensively throughout the history of
the sites. The areas with maximal potential exposures included the pilot separation or processing
buildings and the machine shops. Participants in the risk mapping sessions indicated that the
machinists would "use perc to put out chip fires while machining uranium' They indicated they
would 'use it for everything'.
In addition to the common chlorinated solvents mentioned above and used for cleaning
and degreasing, acetonitrile was used at the Y-12 site.
A.6 Noise
Noise exposure was reported as a problem associated with production operations at both
the X-1O and Y-12 sites. The type of operations conducted at the sites over the history (e.g.
separations operations, calutrons, lithium separation operations, machining) would be consistent
with elevated noise exposures. Risk mapping participants also indicated that hearing protection
requirements, or the adherence to the requirements, was fairly lax in the early years.
A.7 Asbestos
As in many of the DOE facilities, asbestos use was prevalent at both X-10 and Y-12.
Asbestos was common in all building materials, other reported uses included asbestos blankets
asbestos covering on piping, and asbestos gloves. Highest exposures to asbestos would likely
have occurred among maintenance workers.
B. Questionnaire Results
The above-cited agent-specific analysis is principally the results of the risk-mapping
sessions in combination with limited industrial hygiene and radiation monitoring data. We also
sent a questionnaire to a broad cross-section of retirees and terminated workers (n = 500) and
have, to date, received nearly a 50% response rate.
A six page questionnaire was developed that requested information on demographic
status; history of job title, exposures, and job locations at Y-12 and ORNL; health concerns;
current health care; and interest in screening and education. A check list of 63 specific exposures
was included in the questionnaire. A copy of the questionnaire was sent to the 500 individuals
that represented a random sample of retirees and terminated workers from Y-12 and ORNL
Of the 500 questionnaires sent, we received 247 (49.4%) completed questionnaires. We
received this response after a single mailing, which is an excellent result. We did not send
reminders, because we did not know who responded and did not want to send reminders to people
who had responded.
Most respondents first worked for DOE in the 1940's (15%), 1950's (40%) or 1960's
(22%). Most retired from DOE work in the 1980's (32%) or 1990's (52%). The mean age was 73
(s d = 8 6) years with 44% being age 75 or older Only 1% was less than the age of 55 years
,
12
A majority of respondents (136, or 55%) did not list union membership, probably
because they were not members of unions. Among the unions most commonly mentioned were
lAM Local 480— machinists (n=30, 12.1% of total), JBEW Local 760— electrical workers (n=24,
9.7% of total), ATLC (n=15, 6.1% of total) or Plumbers/Pipefitters Local 718 (n=10, 4.0% of
total). Other unions cited were boilermakers, guards, chemical workers, laborers, sheet metal
workers, services employees, and Teamsters. There were 87 job titles represented among the first
job cited by respondents. The most common jobs were engineer, machinist, electrician, chemical
operator, secretary, and technician. Job titles listed as the second job showed a similar pattern.
Table 1-2 lists the exposures and their reported frequencies on the completed
questionnaires at X-l0. The number of people responding to this question varied; percentages
reported include only affirmative or negative responses For all but a few exposures, over one-
half of respondents reported exposure. Especially common was reported exposure to metals
(>60%); solvents (>60%); external and internal radiation (>95%); irritants (>60%); and asbestos
dust (>90%). Beryllium exposure was reported by 88% of respondents.
Table 1-3 lists the exposures and their reported frequencies on the completed
questionnaires at Y-12. The number of people responding to this question varied; percentages
reported include only affirmative or negative responses For all but a few exposures, mostly
radioactive species, over one-half of respondents reported exposure. Exposures among Y-12
workers were reported more commonly than among X-10 workers. Especially common was
reported exposure to metals (>60%); solvents (>70%); external and internal radiation (>95%);
irritants (>80%); and asbestos dust (>95%). Beryllium exposure was reported by 96% of
respondents.
We also obtained information about job titles that respondents had over their careers at
Y-12 AND ORNL). Over 300 job titles have been cited. We are currently aggregating these job
titles in order to better characterize common exposures among similar job titles.
13
Table 1-2
Prevalence of Reported Exposures at X-1O
Chemical or A2ent
% (No.) Reporting
Exposure
Chemical or Agent
% (No.)
Reporting
Exposure
Metals
Thorium
87.5%(35)
Aluminum
93.7%(59)
Californium
63.6%(21)
Arsenic
63 .O%( 17)
Protactinium
45 .O%(9)
Beryllium
87.7%(50)
Lanthanum
58.3%( 14)
Cadmium
85.7%(42)
Cobalt
88.1%(37)
Chromium
81.4%(35)
Cesium
85.4%(35)
Copper
93. 8%(60)
Strontium
89. 5%(34)
Lead
93 .9%(6 1)
Technetium
79.2%( 19)
Lithium or Lithium
Compounds
79.4%(27)
Iodine
77.1%(27)
Mercury
93.6%(58)
Xenon
63.3%(19)
Nickel
86.O%(43)
Tritium
89.2%(33)
Solvents
Acids / Caustics
Acetone
97.2%(70)
Ammonium Hydroxide
93.5%(43)
Acetonitrile
52.2%( 12)
Chlorine
88.9%(40)
Benzene
85.1%(40)
Chromic Acid
86.1%(31)
Carbon Tetrachloride
93. 1%(54)
Fluorine or Hydrofluoric
Acid (HF)
90.2%(46)
Chlorinated Solvents
85.4%(35)
Hydrochloric Acid (HC1)
94.8%(55)
Cutting Fluids
("Trimsol", Dag, etc.)
75.6%(31)
Nitric Acid
95.3%(61)
Freon
85.O%(34)
Perchloric Acid
72% (18)
Hexone (Methyl Isobtuyl
Ketone)
60.9%(14)
Sodium Hydroxide
90.5%(38)
Kerosene
87.8%(36)
Sulfuric Acid
95.1%(58)
Methyl Ethyl Ketone (MEK)
76.3%(29)
Tetramethylammonium
Borohydride (TMAB)
33.3%(6)
Paint or Paint Thinners
75.8%(25)
Other Agents
Perchioroethylene (PERC)
76.7%(23)
Asbestos
95.2%(60)
Tributylphosphate (TBP)
55 .O%( 11)
Cyanide Compounds
59.1 %( 13)
Trichioroethylene (TCE)
93.62%(44)
Dusts (wood, coal, fibers)
89.3%(50)
Polychlorinated Biphenyls
(PCBs)
75.O%(2 1)
Fiberglass
89.6%(43)
Radioactive Materials
Heat
85.7%(42)
External Radiation
(Gamma, Neutron, X-ray)
96.3%(78)
Herbicides / Pesticides
47.8%(1 1)
Internal Radiation Exposure
81.8%(27)
Noise
95.8%(68)
Uranium
93.7%(59)
Phosgene
38.9%(7)
Neptunium
57.1 %( 16)
Repetitive Motion
73.7%(28)
Plutonium
90.7%(39)
Silica
61 .5%( 16)
Curium
65.5%(19)
Welding Fumes
85.2%(46)
14
Table 1-3
Prevalence of Reported Exposures at Y-12
Chemical or Agent
% (No.)
Reporting
Exposure
Chemical or Agent
% (No.)
Reporting
Exposure
Metals
Thorium
87.5%(42)
Aluminum
95.7%(89)
Californium
46.4%( 13)
Arsenic
64.1 %(25)
Protactinium
39.1 %(9)
Beryllium
95.6%(109)
Lanthanum
45.5%( 10)
Cadmium
89.1%(49)
Cobalt
82.1%(32)
Chromium
88.1%(52)
Cesium
73.5%(25)
Copper
96.3 %(79)
Strontium
75 .0%(21)
Lead
96.6%(85)
Technetium
47.6%( 10)
Lithium or Lithium Compounds
93.3%(70)
Iodine
75.8%(25)
Mercury
96.3 %( 104)
Xenon
40.0%(8)
Nickel
92.3% (72)
Tritium
78. 8%(26)
Solvents
Acids / Caustics
Acetone
97.9%(92)
Ammonium Hydroxide
94.0%(47)
Acetonitrile
77.4%(24)
Chlorine
93.1%(54)
Benzene
93.6%(58)
Chromic Acid
83.8%(31)
Carbon Tetrachioride
97.5%(78)
Fluorine or Hydrofluoric
Acid (HF)
92.7%(5 1)
Chlorinated Solvents
90.4%(47)
Hydrochloric Acid (HC1)
92.3 %(60)
Cutting Fluids
("Trimsol", Dag, etc.)
92.3%(72)
Nitric Acid
94.3%(66)
Freon
92.8%(64)
Perchioric Acid
69.0%(20)
Hexone (Methyl Isobtuyl
Ketone)
73.3%(22)
Sodium Hydroxide
91 .7%(44)
Kerosene
85.1%(40)
Sulfuric Acid
92.1%(58)
Methyl Ethyl Ketone (MEK)
83.3%(35)
Tetramethylammonium
Borohydride (TMAB)
60.0%(15)
Paint or Paint Thinners
90.7%(49)
Other Agents
Perchioroethylene (PERC)
93.9%(77)
Asbestos
97.6%(82)
Tributylphosphate (TBP)
60.0%( 15)
Cyanide Compounds
72.2%(26)
Trichloroethylene (TCE)
95.2%(60)
Dusts (wood, coal, fibers)
95.2%(79)
Polychiorinated Biphenyls
(PCBs)
84.8%(39)
Fiberglass
94.l%(64)
Radioactive materials
Heat
94.2%(65)
External Radiation
(Gamma, Neutron, X-ray)
96.1%(73)
Herbicides / Pesticides
63.2%(24)
Internal radiation exposure
87.8%(43)
Noise
96.9%(95)
Uranium
99.2%(1 16)
Phosgene
45.5%(10)
Neptunium
44.4%( 12)
Repetitive Motion
87.5 %(35)
Plutonium
93 .0%(39)
Silica
75.0%(24)
Curium
43.5%(10)
Welding Fumes
91.9%(68)
15
C. Nature and Extent of Health Impacts Experienced by Y-12 and ORNL Workers
The review of epidemiological studies is succinct, and the reader is referred to Part II:
Section 7. Epidemiologic studies at Y-12 and ORNL show excess rates of selected diseases,
including cancer, especially lung cancer, beryllium-related sensitivity and disease, asbestos-
related disease, and selected neurologic effects.
D. Educational Needs and Health Concerns of Former Workers
We have two sources of information on the health concerns, health care, and educational
needs of former Y-12 and ORNL workers: the focus groups and the questionnaire results.
D.1 Focus Group Results
The focus groups were invaluable in providing insight about how former workers viewed
the "significance" of their prior exposures, and their current state of knowledge, health concerns,
and health care. Inclusion of 23 workers, most of whom had more than 25 to 30 years of
employment at Y-12 and ORNL), provided a broad spectrum of opinion. A wide range of job
titles were represented in the groups.
The following themes and recommendations arose during the focus group sessions:
1. The need exists for an occupational medical surveillance program.
Focus group participants felt that an occupational medical program was
necessary because of their primary care physicians' lack of knowledge of the
impact of occupational exposures.
2. Independent physicians without any ties to DOE or the contractors should administer
the medical testing program in cooperation with ATLC.
Participants cited trust and credibility as the most important components of any
medical testing program or there would be lack of interest and participation.
They discouraged Oak Ridge as a testing site because of its close ties with DOE
and the contractors. Local clinics should be used but they should be within
driving distance.
3. The testing program should incorporate plant medical records.
Participants stressed their desire to include plant medical records, if feasible, in the
evaluation.
4. Participants favored directly mailed invitations to inform workers of the program.
The workers felt that the best way to reach X-10 and Y-12 workers is through
direct mail, perhaps having the contractors send a notice with the pension and
pay checks.
5.
The testing program should be ongoing rather than a one-time evaluation.
16
Participants repeatedly stressed the need for periodic testing because a clean bill
of health at one time is no guarantee against future disease
6. Current as well as former workers should participate in the testing program.
The focus group members felt that the program should begin with the retirees but
should include current workers because of the mistrust of the site clinic.
7. All of the participants expressed a desire that early detection of lung cancer through
the CT scan should be implemented as part of their program.
Additional detail regarding these issues is provided the complete analysis by Sylvia
Kieding in Section VI of Part II of this report.
D.2 Questionnaire Results
Over three-quarters of the respondents reported that they had seen a physician during the
12 months prior to completing the questionnaire (87%). Nearly all (98%) of respondents reported
having a personal physician. Over three-quarters of respondents (n= 199, 83%) reported that they
have periodic checkups when they are not ill. The vast majority of respondents have health
insurance (n=235, or 97%).
When asked whether they were concerned that their health might have been affected by
working at Y- 12 and ORNL, 62% (n= 144) reported that they believed that their current or future
health might be so affected. On the other hand, the majority of the respondents were interested in
E
participating in a medical screening if offered Nearly 60% of respondents (n=242, or 59%)
stated that they were somewhat to very interested in participating in a screening.
The majority of respondents (176, or 76%) reported that their personal physician knew
that they had worked at Y- 12 and ORNL. However, when asked if their personal physicians were
aware of their specific exposures that they had had at Y- 12 and ORNL, the vast majority (156, or
67%) reported that they did not believe that their physician was aware of the specific exposures
that they had had at Y-12 and ORNL.
E. Size of the Target Population
Estimating the size of the target population naturally requires defining what the target
population is.
In the following section, we provide the rationale for a targeted medical
surveillance program that meets the criteria established by the Department of Energy. We will
submit a full plan for Phase II, which will describe in detail the rationale and design of a medical
surveillance and risk communication program.
To fulfill the mandate for medical surveillance established by the DOE, we will propose a
medical monitoring program designed to detect and to reduce the burden of chronic lung djsease,
cancer, kidney and liver disease, and hearing loss.
• Preventive Pulmonary Health Workers at Y-12 and ORNL are likely to be at
increased risk of a variety of lung diseases, including chronic obstructive lung
disease, pneumoconioses, and lung cancer. They worked with a variety of irritants,
f
fibrogenic dusts and lung carcinogens (asbestos and beryllium at a minimum) It is
justified to include all workers with significant exposures to lung irritants, asbestos
17
and other lung carcinogens, mercury and beryllium in a medical screening and risk
communication program. Since these agents were in widespread use at Y-12 and
ORNL, large numbers of Y- 12 and ORNL workers were likely to have experienced
these exposures.
• Cancer Detection program Significant exposure to a variety of carcinogens
occurred at Y-12 and ORNL over the life of these facilities. Former and current X-l0
and Y- 12 workers would benefit from a targeted cancer detection and education
program. Lung cancer is the single most important cancer among Y- 12 and ORNL,
because it is common and has been found to occur in excessive rates among workers
at these facilities.
• Hearing Loss Excessive noise exposure likely occurred at selected parts of the Y-
12 and ORNL complex, leaving nearby workers at risk for hearing loss. For workers
who were in those areas, a hearing testing program would be justified and beneficial.
•
Diseases of Other Organs Exposure to metals and solvents was common at Y-12
and ORNL. Screening for kidney, liver, and relevant neurologic disease would be
appropriate for such workers.
These screening program elements and targeted conditions are entirely consistent with
the currently-funded DOE former worker medical surveillance programs at other sites and with
the national medical screening protocol established by DOE for this program.
Results of the risk-mapping exercises yield observation on which facilities, buildings and
job titles appear to be associated with the greatest likelihood of significant levels of specific
exposures. The details were provided in a previous section and also in Section V of Part II of this
report.
Estimation of the numbers of workers who are alive and at risk for occupational disease
must be approximate. The roster of currently pensioned alive workers from Y-12 and ORNL
includes a total of 7,118 workers, consisting of 3,891 Y-12 retirees and 3,227 ORNL retirees.
This group of retirees currently receive a pension through BWXT, and we have current addresses
for them.
Terminated workers who did not work long enough to receive a pension are more
difficult to estimate. In the mortality studies at Y-12 (Loomis and Wolf) and ORNL (Richardson
and Wing), mortality follow-up of workers who were first hired between 1947 and 1972 (ORNL)
or 1974 (Y-12) was completed through 1990. Of the 14,095 ORNL workers in the study, 3,269
(23%) had died through 1990. Of the 10,620 Y-12 workers in the study, 8,119 had only worked at
Y-12 and 1,861 (23%) of these workers had died through 1990. A minimum of 16,000 Y-12 and
ORNL workers first employed between 1947 and 1974 were alive in 1990. Assuming and
additional 25% have died since 1990, approximately 11,550 workers first hired between 1947 and
1974 at Y-12 and ORNL should still be alive. This figure doesn't include ex-workers first hired
after 1974 but not employed long enough to be pensioned. This number is not known.
Given these data, a reasonable provisional range of the numbers of living ex-workers
from Y- 12 and X- 10 is 12,000 to 20,000. Given the incompleteness of information available at
present, the estimate of the size of the population at risk must be regarded as approximate. It is,
however, sufficient for planning purposes.
18
IV. NEED FOR MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE AND RISK COMMUNICATION
The results of the 12 month needs assessment study support the need for a medical
monitoring and risk communication program. This conclusion is based on the evidence that large
numbers of workers had exposures to detrimental agents, the strong need expressed by former
workers for a credible targeted program of medical surveillance and education, and specific
epidemiologic studies at Y-12 and ORNL that document excess risk of selected diseases.
In Phase II, we propose to develop and implement a health protection and risk
communication program for Y- 12 and ORNL workers centered on the workers at risk for 1)
chronic respiratory disease, including chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD) and the
pneumoconioses, 2) cancer, including lung cancer 3) kidney, liver and neurologic disease, and 4)
hearing loss. We select these conditions, because they meet the criteria established by the DOE
for medical monitoring and risk communication. Our logic is two-fold. First, these diseases are
caused by exposures that have occurred at Y-12 and ORNL. Second, a medical monitoring
program framed around these conditions can provide tangible benefits. It can lead to early
detection of cancer, which can increase survival and quality of life. A well-designed program can
identify COPD and the pneumoconioses for which advice about proper treatment (COPD),
vaccinations, and prompt treatment of superimposed infections will be highly beneficial. Lung
cancer is amenable to early detection through rational screening, and can be complemented by
smoking cessation programs, thereby reducing both occupational and non-occupational risks. The
severity of kidney, liver, and neurologic disease can be reduced by control of other risk factors
(e.g. — hypertensionand alcohol consumption).
The risk communication will be a centerpiece of a health protection/medical monitoring
program. While there remains considerable uncertainty about the health risks experienced as a
result of working at Y-12 and ORNL, this uncertainty must be openly communicated by credible
sources. In combination with a medical surveillance program designed to protect health, accurate
information about risks will be itself health promoting. We propose the hard outcomes noted
above for medical monitoring, in part, because they can be identified with certainty. The health
outcomes that we seek to include a monitoring program are highly amenable to screening on a
population basis. After participation in the screening program, former and current Y-12 and
ORNL workers will have increased real knowledge about their personal health status, what is
known about their risks, and how they can promote their own health. In conclusion, mounting
such a program in Phase II should make a tangible improvement in people's lives.
19
Section V. Exposure Assessment
1.0 Introduction
The purpose of this one-year study was to identify primary worker exposures that
occurred over time at the X-1O and Y-12 facilities in Oak Ridge. These exposures were
characterized, to the extent possible, to allow for a means of determination of worker
populations at greatest risk. A central part of the exposure assessment included the use of
building specific risk mapping. This approach allowed for input directly from those
involved historically at each building or area of interest. This risk mapping process also
allowed the researchers to gain a great deal of insight on day-to-day operations and
exposures that took place at these sites through time.
2.0 Description of the Sites
x-10
The original X- 10 facility consisted of the air-cooled graphite pile or reactor for
producing plutonium, a pilot plant for isolating plutonium, and some support facilities.
The chemical separations pilot plant construction started in March, and the reactor went
critical and began operation November 4,1943. The site was initially challenged with
several major goals including:
1. Conduct the necessary studies and develop a workable and dependable method for
chemically separating and isolating plutonium from uranium metal and from
fission products.
2. Develop a process for recovering the partially depleted uranium metal that had
been irradiated and used in the development work at the pilot plant.
3. Develop methods for producing certain other radioisotopes such as barium and
lanthanum for use at other Manhattan project sites.
The first major facility constructed at Clinton Laboratories, X-10 site, was the graphite
reactor for irradiating uranium and producing plutonium. The second major facility
constructed was the pilot plant (now Building 3019 but formerly Building 205) where the
process for separating and purifying plutonium was to be tested
After the original mission X-10 continued to do research, pilot plant work and production
work in the areas of isotope production, isotope separation and purification, and reactor
research. Detailed descriptions of the primary buildings and operations for the X- 10 site
are outlined in Section 5.0 of this report.
Y-12 Site
The Oak Ridge Y-12 Plant was built for the US Army Corps of Engineers in 1943 as part
of the Manhattan Project under the name Clinton Engineer Works. Tennessee Eastman, a
subsidiary of the Eastman Kodak Company, was the original Y-12 site contractor under
the agreement with the Army Corps of Engineers. In 1947 the oversight of the operations
were turned over to the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) and Tennessee Eastman
v-i
Company was replaced as the primary contractor by Carbide and Carbon Chemical
Corporation Union Carbide took over in 1957 and Martin Manetta Energy Systems
(MMES) and Lockheed Martin took over in 1984 until 1999. The current contractor
BWXT took over in 1999.
The Y-12 plant had five principal responsibilities: 1) Development of the
electromagnetic separation process for uranium, 2) Production of nuclear weapon
components, 3) Fabrication support to nuclear weapon design agencies, 4) Support for the
ORNL, and 5) Support to other government agencies and facilities. The major programs
and activities at the Y-12 site are listed in Table 1
Table 1. Major Programs at the Y-12 Site
Electromagnetic Separation of U-235
1943-1948
Electromagnetic Separation of Stable Isotopes
1947 — 1990
Production of Uranium Weapon Components
1948 — 1992
ELEX Separation of Lithium Isotopes
1950— 1956
Production of Thorium Weapons Components
1950s — 1975
Waste Disposal in S-3 Ponds
1951 — 1990
Production of Lithium and Beryllium Weapon Components
1950s — 1992
COLEX Separation of Lithium Isotopes
1956 — 1963
Waste Disposal in New Hope Pond
1963 — 1990
\
Detailed descriptions of the primary buildings and operations for the X-10 site are outlined in
Section 6.0 of this report.
V-2
3.0 METHODOLOGY
To best summarize the exposures at the X-1O and Y-12 facilities three basic approaches
were initiated: 1) Risk Mapping of Priority Facilities and Buildings, 2) Exposures
Records Review and Assessment, and 3) Development and Dissemination of a
Questionnaire to former workers. The approach to each of these items is detailed within
this section.
3.1 Risk Mapping
Risk Mapping is an approach that has been used extensively at industrial facilities as a
tool to assist workers and/or joint health and safety committees in determining high-risk
areas within their facilities. Traditionally the technique is used to identify current
problem areas within a facility and to assist in developing an intervention strategy for
resolving the problem areas. (Parker-Brown, 1995, LOSH, 1996) For this project the risk
mapping approach was used to map past exposure conditions at the identified priority
facilities and the priority buildings within those facilities.
In addition to using the mapping process for mapping past exposure conditions within the
buildings of interest, the method was also modified to allow the field researchers to
collect semi-quantitative exposure data for each identified exposure of concern. In
addition, the field researchers were also tasked with collecting data regarding
building/process characteristics (i.e., description of major processes, number of workers
in the building of interest, years of operation, etc.).
Several steps were necessary in developing and running the risk mapping sessions. The
steps were as follows:
1) CPS, Inc. customized the risk mapping method for use in retrospective exposure
assessment. Part of customizing the risk-mapping tool included the development of a
"job exposure information sheet" which was used to collect job/process/exposure
information for each chemical / agent identified on the risk map. (see Attachment 1)
In addition, a "Building Characteristics Report Form" was developed to allow the
field researchers to collect descriptive information on the building of interest (i.e.,
description of major processes, number of workers, years of operation, etc.). (see
Attachment 2)
2) CPS, Inc. in conjunction with the PACE International Union staff developed a
training guidebook for use in training the field researchers in the technique. The
guidebook was constructed to include baseline information regarding the project as
well as basic information regarding medical surveillance.
3) CPS, Inc. in conjunction with the PACE International Union conducted a train the
trainer for the field researchers. The field researchers for this project included ATLC
Health and Safety representatives. The train the trainer session was a four hour
V-3
session to familiarize the field research team with the risk mapping methodology and
focus group techniques.
4) Selection of "experts" for initial risk mapping session for the X-1O and Y-12
facilities was done by CPS, Inc. in coordination with the PACE International along
with the ATLC Local Union research teams. The "experts" selected for the initial
session consisted of hourly workers as well as salary workers (including line
supervisors) with extensive experience at the site. While the group did not consist of
a typical expert panel which might be assembled by researchers in order to
characterize past exposures at an industrial site, the group had a vast amount of site
experience and was selected to encompass a broad array of job classifications,
facilities, and process buildings of interest.
5) The initial risk mapping session focused on the entire site (X-1O and Y-12 separately)
and was conducted to assist in determining priority areas for future, more specific,
risk mapping sessions. As a product from each of these sessions, the expert group
produced a listing of the primary facilities of concern with respect to occupational
exposures at Y-12 and X-1O. These lists, along with information obtained through
review of previous research studies, were used to identify areas for future risk
mapping sessions.
6) Building specific risk mapping sessions were conducted for priority buildings at each
of the facilities. These risk mapping sessions allowed for the collection of the
aforementioned data sheets: Job Exposure Information Sheet and the Building
Characteristics Report.
7) The Job Exposure Information Sheet data along with information from the Building
Characteristics Reports were compiled into a database to allow for assessment of the
data. Appendix A includes a summary of the results collected during the risk
mapping sessions. The data sheets indicate exposures by building and by job title.
3.2 Exposure Records Review and Assessment
The primary focus of this preliminary exposure assessment was to determine major
exposures as a function of building / area, department, or job classification. Another
primary need is to establish an approach for linking the building / exposure data to an
individual within the former worker roster.
The major types of information used in the development of this report include:
1.
X-1O and Y-12 External and Internal Radiation Databases (requested from the
sites; not yet received)
2. X-1O and Y-12 lET Air Sampling Data (requested; not yet received); including
Y12 Beryllium, Thorium, Mercury and Uranium data
3. X-1O and Y-12 External and Internal Radiation CEDR Databases (Cragle, 1996)
V-4
a. Y-12 Film Data (1950 — 1988)
b. Y-12 Uranium Urinalysis Data (1960 — 1985)
c. Y-12 Whole Body Counting Data (1960 — 1985)
d. X-10 External Exposure Data (1943 — 1985)
e, X-10 Urinalysis Data (1950 — 1985)
f. X-10 Whole Body Counting Data (1950 — 1985)
4. CEDR Multiple Site Study —X-10 databases regarding building history,
department history, and IH exposures by division (Wolf, 1998)
5. X-10 University of North Carolina Health Study analytical files (Richardson,
1998)
a. X-10 Adjusted External Radiation Data
6. X-10 Health Physics Quarterly / Annual Reports (Davis, Hart, Snyder, and
Turner, 1958—1983)
7. Y-12 Health and Safety Quarterly Reports (1952 — 1962) (Y-12, 1952-1962)
8. Oak Ridge Health Studies Phase I/il Reports -- Off-Site Dose Reconstruction
Project and cited documents related to Buildings and Operations (ChemRisk,
1993)
9. University of Cincinnati Medical Surveillance Phase I Report and supporting
database (with building exposure information and process information) (Bingham,
1997)
10. Oak Ridge Y-12 Mercury Task Force Documentation (Mercury Task Force,
1983a,b)
11. Site and Division History Documents
12. Environmental Remediation reports
13. Site Audit References (e.g. Tiger Team Report, Recycled Uranium Mass Balance
Study Report, etc.)
For the two sites there is a fair amount of information regarding the radiation exposures
that allowed for at least a preliminary assessment of priority departments. The available
databases related to external and internal exposures were analyzed to determine those
departments with a greater potential for external and internal radiation exposures.
Generally, the data was reviewed to determine the departments with the greatest
v-S
percentage of positive values. This analysis is detailed in Appendix B. Also included in
this appendix are the query files used to make the assessments.
There are several notable limitations of the radiation data available including: there is no
external data available for Y-12 workers prior to 1960, available data is based on site
policy of who was potentially exposed which therefore greatly limits this analysis, the
data in the database is annual summary data for individuals (not individual film badge
exposure period readings and no hard copy records were reviewed), the data usually did
not indicate building (only listing department or division), department numbers may not
necessarily be associated with a work location therefore complicating the analysis, etc.
Other data files which were reviewed preliminarily to assist in the interpretation of the
radiation dose records and H&S report references include: Site Specific Job
Classification database, X-10 Building Number and Building Names Database, and X-10
Department Number, Department Name, and Division Names (see Appendix C).
Another key source that was used to supplement the risk mapping data with regard to
exposures other than radiation was the H&S summary reports. These reports, while
varying in usefulness over time, included very useful summary information with regard
to the following: IH monitoring data, occurrence frequency (sometimes by building), and
radiation dose summary information which was to some extent used to validate the
database records, A summary of some of the data (air sampling, urine, and occurrence
report data) from the available H&S reports is included in Appendix D.
3.3 Questionnaire for Former Workers
A questionnaire was developed by CPS, Inc. and Queens College to survey former
workers regarding health status, health care needs, work history, and exposure
information A pilot questionnaire regarding the exposure information was used during
the risk mapping activities Approximately 70 individuals completed a questionnaire
(which did not include any personal identifiers —name, SSN, badge number). Analysis
of the preliminary data is included in Appendix E The individuals represented the
following job titles for Y-12: Machinists (12), Outside Machinists (2), Chemical
Operators (5), Electroplaters (3), Pipefitters (2), Boiler Maker (2), Painter (2), Insulator
(2), Welder (1), Electrician (3), Utility Operator (3), Carpenter (1), Supervisors (2), and
no job title (1). The individuals represented the following job titles for X-1O: Chemical
Technicians (7), Machinists (5), Laboratory Technicians (3), Laboratory Supervisors (2),
Electroplater (1), Health Physicist (1), Tank Farm Operator (1), Group Leader (1),
Pipefitter (1), Electrician (1), Millwright (2), Welder (1) and no job title (1).
4.0 Results
The primary objective of this investigation was to identify the primary exposures that
took place over the site history at the two sites. The results of the risk mapping work are
incorporated into the following section which outlines both the major operations at the
sites, and where possible, at the buildings along with the primary exposures. The listing
V-6
of the primary exposures is based primarily on the risk mapping results but is
supplemented with information from database, past study results or document reviews.
The CEDR database files for the Oak Ridge site (the Center for Epidemiological
Research — CER data files (Cragle, 1996) were used to assess the relationship of external
and internal exposures as a function of time and department number. The assessment of
priority departments with regard to various types of radiation exposure described is, for
the most part, based on the CER data files. In some cases, and where data was available,
other sources were referenced to verify the prioritization approach. These other data
sources include the Annual Health Physics Reports (available for X-10 for years from
1952 — 1983 and for Y-12 for the years from 1950 — 1962 (Davis, Hart, Snyder, and
Turner and Y-12 (50-62), and the CEDR Mortality study data files (Richardson, 1998).
For X-10 departments with greater potential for internal radiation exposure were assessed
based on the urinalysis data along with the in-vivo monitoring records. Selected
radionuclides included in the urinalysis data were assessed to determine areas
(departments) most likely to be monitored for the selected radionuclide of interest.
Again, it must be stressed that this analysis is limited since it does not address those
individuals that were not monitored and assumes that the site selection of those most at
risk for potential internal exposures was appropriate throughout the site history.
Departments with greater than approximately 10% of the total samples of selected
radionuclides of interest are noted in the table below.
Radionuclide
Department Number
Strontium-90
3370, 3078, 3390
Plutonium-239 (PuO and Pu9)
3370, 3390, 3602
Gross Alpha
3370, 3290
Uranium-234
3370, 3470, 3290
Curium-244
3370, 3602
Tritium
3602, 3369
Aggregate of selected radionuclides
3604, 3079, 3193, 3405, 3325, 3675, 3078,
3390, 3003, 3470, 3650
Reviewing the In-vivo records, which are associated with type of in-vivo monitoring,
division, and HP Area (Building). The priority divisions and buildings based on the
review of this data are as follows: Buildings: 2016, 3001, 3019, 3038, 3517, 3550, 4500,
5500, 7900, and 7920 and Divisions: Analytical Chemistry, Chemical Technology,
Health Physics, Isotopes, Operations, and Plant and Equipment.
v-7
Reviewing the External dose records for X-10 to determine departments with greater
potential for exposure was done by determining the departments with more than 10% of
total records for annual doses greater than 500 mrem. Using this approach the following
departments were identified: 3650, 3390, 3370, 3363, 3360, 3193, 3078, 3X, and 3C
For Y-12 the greater potential for radiation exposure was based on External Dose
(including analysis of gamma, beta and neutron dose summary data) greater than 500
mrem and analysis of the urinalysis data to determine the departments with greater than
10% of total samples The priority departments based on review of the external dose data
(penetrating, skin, and neutron) include: 2018, 2617, 2619, 2703, 2618, and 2702.
For Y-12 urine data the highest 5% of all samples were reviewed and departments with
greater than 10% of the total were selected as high potential for internal exposures.
Based on this criteria the following departments were identified: 2014, 2015, 2077,
2158, 2230, 2301, 2617, 2618, 2619, 2638, 2687, 2702, 2776, 2791, 2793, and 5001. Of
these departments it appears that 2617, 2618 and 2619 are the departments with the
highest potential This was deduced by reviewing the top 2% of all samples and noticing
that these three departments accounted for 35%, 17% and 9% of the samples respectively.
Other exposures of interest that were used to prioritize locations, departments, divisions,
or jobs to be prioritized for screening included: Beryllium, Mercury, Caustics (Nitric
Acid, FIF, Lithium compounds), Solvents (Carbon Tetrachloride, perchloroethylene,
Acetonitrile, TCE), Asbestos, and Noise. Each of these chemicals or classes is discussed
in detail in Section 7 0 The table below summarizes the departments, divisions
buildings or job classifications that likely had high potential for exposure to each of these
agents.
Chemical I Agent or Class
Department, Building, Division, or job
Beryllium
Machinists, Buildings (Alpha-5, 9202, Alpha-3,
9995, 9766, 9998, Beta-4, 9733, and 9215 and 3019,
ORNL Reactor Buildings, and 3012?)
Mercury
Buildings (Alpha-2,4,5, Beta-4, 9202, 4501, 8 1-10)
and Departments (2025, 2026, 2681, 2682, 2683,
2685, and 2690)
Caustics (Nitric Acid, HF, Lithium Compounds)
Buildings (3019, 9212, 9215, 3505, Beta-2,4,
Alpha-5, 9292, 9203, 9206, and 940 1-2)
Solvents (Carbon Tetrachioride, TCE, Acetonitrile,
Perchloroethylene)
Buildings (9202, 9203, Beta-2, 9205, 9212, 9215,
3019, 3505, 3508 and all machine shops)
Asbestos
Maintenance departments
Noise
Maintenance and Operations departments
V-8
5.0 X-10 Buildings
5.1 2026 Radioactive Materials Analytical Labs (RMAL) (1964 -
Building Description
The Radioactive Materials Analytical Laboratory (RMAL) receives, stores, assays
and disposes of a wide variety of radioactive materials. Assay operations included
dissolutions, dilutions, separations, followed by physical, chemical and radiochemical
examinations of individual samples.
The RMAL facility was constructed in 1964 (with additions in 1966 and 1985) for the
purpose of providing a laboratory for general analytical chemistry for radioactive
materials and specifically to support the processing and examination of spent reactor
fuel.
This building housed general radioactive material analytical laboratories and six hot
cells with an unloading cell in the center of the building. The building also had two
labs with glovebox operations for high level alpha work. (ORNL, 1997(a))
Primary Exposures
The primary exposures reported during risk mapping sessions included: fission
products, tritium. Other potential exposures of interest include: Carbon-14, Cobolt-
60, Nickel-63, Srontium-90, Cesium- 134,137, Europium- 152,154,155, Thorium-
228,229,232, Uranium-233 ,234,23 5,238, Neptunium-237, Plutonium-
238,239,240,241,242, Americium-24 1,243, Curium-243,244,245,246 and
Californium-249,25 1.
5.2 2525 Research Shops ("Green Door Machine Shop") (1957)
Building Description
Ultrasonic Machining, Electrical Discharge Machining, Metal Evaporation, Grinding,
Plastics and Rubber work, a Welding Shop and a Plating shop. Also machined
transite.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: Beryllium, asbestos, welding fumes, and acids.
5.3 3001 Pile Building (including Graphite Reactor) (1943 —1963)
V-9
Building Description
The Clinton Pile has been known by various names, including the X-Pile and the
ORNL Graphite Reactor. The term 'pile' was used to describe the reactor because it
was assembled by piling up blocks of graphite with pieces of uranium interspersed.
In the pile the graphite served as the neutron moderator, slowing the neutrons to allow
further reaction with the fissionable Uranium-235 to produce a chain reaction. The
pile was a 24 foot graphite block with holes or channels for the fuel or for experiment
ports. The entire cube was surrounded by a 7 foot thick concrete shield. The reactor
was air cooled and originally the exhaust was not filtered. The reactor first went
critical in the fall of 1943. (ChemRisk, 1993)
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported during risk mapping sessions included: Plutonium,
Internal radiation, External Radiation, Iodine-131, Strontium-90, Colbalt-60, Curium-
244, and asbestos. It was mentioned that the Building 3019 1959 Plutonium incident
contaminated building 3001 (which is situated across the road from building 3019).
5.4 3005 LITR (1952 — 1968)
Building Description
The LITR was originally built to be a small mock-up or training facility to test the
design of the controls and hydraulics of the MTR reactor. This facility served as a
training ground for the operators of the full scale facility (Phillips Petroleum
personnel from MTR in INEL were trained in this facility). This facility was used as
an experimental reactor until 1968. (ChemRisk, 1997) (Stapleton, 1993)
Primary Exposures
The primary exposures noted for this building during risk mapping sessions included:
External radiation, internal radiation, and neutron exposures.
5.5 MTR Materials Test Reactor (1946 —1948)
The MTR was a high flux reactor that had the chief function of intense neutron
bombardment for testing materials to be used in future reactors. The main features of
the reactor were parallel uranium fuel plates between aluminum plates, with water
used as the moderator and the coolant and with beryllium used as a reflector. After
a short testing period the MTR design and function was moved to Idaho (INEL).
5.6 Daniels Pile (1946 —1948)
A reactor designed with a bed of enriched uranium 'pebbles' moderated by beryllium
oxide and cooled by helium gas. This experimental 'pebble bed' reactor was only in
v-b
operation until 1948. Further research in this area was shifted to Argonne National
Labs.
5.7 3010 Bulk Shielding Building (1950 — 1991)
Building Description
The Bulk Shielding Reactor was originally built to support the Aircraft Nuclear
Propulsion (ANP) project. Much of the focus of the project was to develop effective
but lightweight shielding which would protect both the flight crew and the equipment.
The BSR was a swimming pooi reactor in which the enriched uranium core was
submerged in water for both cooling and neutron moderation, and could be moved
around in the concrete pool to test bulk shielding materials in various configurations.
The BSR was upgraded (BSF-ll reactor — 1960-1991) to include a forced cooling
system and took over the function of the general purpose research reactor for the
facility (replaced the graphite reactor which was shut down at the same time).
(Stapleton, 1993)
Primary Exposures
The primary exposures noted for this building during risk mapping sessions included:
External radiation, internal radiation, and neutron exposures.
5.8 3Ol2Rolling Mill (1947 —late 70s)
Building Description
This was the primary production plant for the fuel elements for all reactors. The
facility also performed work for SRS and the Navy as well as fuel tubes for the HFIR
in the late 70s.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Uranium, beryllium, aluminum, zirconium,
solvents, External Radiation, and Internal Radiation.
5.9 3019 Separations Building (1943 - 1991) (originally Building 205)
Building Description
The original purpose of Building 3019 (the Pilot Plant) was to test processes for
plutonium separation, determine needs for full scale production level separation, and
provide plutonium for other sites to use for evaluation purposes. When it was
constructed it included 6 large underground cells. (Brooksbank, 1994) One of the
most significant incidents involving an explosion in an evaporator cell in Building
v-il
3019 occurred in 1959. The explosion resulted in a release of plutonium out of the
building and into building 3001 (across the street) Risk mapping participants
reported that subsequent to this accident health physics practices were improved.
(Parrot, 1961, and Morgan, 1959)
Significant Processes or Pilot Operations in the 3019 Complex
Bismuth Phosphate Process (1943 — 1945)
The first process selected for separation was the Bismuth phosphate co-precipitation
process. The fuel slugs came directly from the Graphite reactor (3001) through a
canal that ran between the buildings. The fuel was allowed to cool (decay of the short
lived fission products) prior to being brought into the Pilot plant. The process was
conducted in six hot cells within Building 205 (later Building 3019) The slugs were
first dissolved in a solution of nitric acid with a mercury catalyst (to remove the
aluminum casing) The uranium was dissolved in a heated mtnc acid bath By the
end of January 1944, 113 ton per day of irradiated fuel from the reactor was going
through the pilot plant, although the low pile power level and short operating time
had not allowed the plutonium concentration to build up to the planned levels.
(Genung, 1993) Eventually the plutonium was separated by adding bismuth nitrate
and phosphoric acid creating bismuth phosphate which carried the plutonium out of
solution The fission product decontamination factors for the plutonium separations
were terrible resulting in high levels of fission products in the product.
Redox 25 Process (1946 — 1948)
The Redox process was a solvent extraction process for separation and purification of
plutonium and uranium. Solvent extraction methods take advantage of the fact that
nitrates of plutonium and uranium are readily soluble in certain organic liquids, while
the nitrates of fission products are generally insoluble in these liquids. The Redox
process, which used methyl isobutyl ketone (hexone) as the organic solvent and
aluminum nitrate in the aqueous phase to improve separation, was anticipated to be
simpler and more economical than the bismuth phosphate precipitation process, but at
first it yielded uranium of insufficient purity.
The "25" Process was designed to recover the highly enriched uranium from used
uranium aluminum alloy fuel elements from the MTR in Idaho. This process was the
predecessor to the Idaho chemical plant process.
Purex Process (1949 — 1960)
The PUREX process (Plutonium Uranium Reduction Extraction Process) was
developed on a pilot scale starting in 1949. The Purex process used solvent
extraction with tributyl phosphate (TBP) in Varsol (organic diluent) and nitric acid as
a salting agent. They also experimented with TBP in Amsco 123-15 hydrocarbon
diluent (kerosene) The uranium was isolated as UNHand after an ion exchange
process the Plutonium was isolated as Plutonium nitrate (Pu(N03)4). In addition to
V-12
isolating plutonium and uranium, the Purex process also isolated fission product
isotopes of zirconium, niobium, and ruthenium (by distilling off the nitric acid for re-
use).
In addition to the purex process ORNL also developed an ion-exchange plutonium
isolation method and a process for recovering plutonium from metallurgical wastes.
In 195 1-1953 the Purex process was conducted on a continuous process (rather than
batch processing) with a total of 34 runs being conducted (each run with
approximately 140 slugs (—250 kg)). The Purex process was subsequently run in full-
scale operation at the Hanford facility
From 1950 through 1960 the Purex process was used on varying feed materials
including Uranium slugs, NRX reactor fuel, SRP fuel, BNLreactorfuel, SRP
Uranium slugs, and CP-2 reactor fuel The materials recovered included Uranium-
233, Uranium-235, Plutonium-239, and Plutonium-240 Among the fission products,
cerium, zirconium, niobium, ruthenium, and iodine tend to be extracted along with
the products and are most difficult to separate from uranium, plutonium and thorium.
(Bruce, 1956)
Prior to using the TBP based solvent extraction processes other solvents had been
investigated including: pentaether, diisopropyl ether, tertiary alcohols, dibutyl
cellosolve, theonyl trifluoroacetone, and dibutyl carbitol. (Genung, 1993)
Thorex Process (1954 — 1960 and 1969 — 1976)
Thorex process is similar to the Purex process and is used for separating thorium and
uranium Used diethylbenzene instead of kerosene and a different solvent replacing
TBP. The early runs were performed on Thorium slugs and later the process was
used to recover U-233 from U-23302-Th02 hard scrap Significant forms of
radioactive material encountered in the Thorex processing were Protactinium-233 and
Ruthenium Ruthenium was observed to be a limiting fission product contaminant in
the Thorex process, with levels higher during short decay runs. The separation of
Protactinium-233, while unsuccessful, was a significant contributor to radiation levels
and particulate releases. Because of concerns with personnel exposures in the
facility, the short-decay runs were terminated (around 1957) (Genung, 1993,
ChemRisk, 1997) A 1958 Health and Safety report indicated airborne levels up to
1 .7E-8 microcuries per cubic centimeter beta and gamma radioactivity was measured
at a laboratory area air monitoring station during a short decay run. This value was
approximately 2000 times higher than the annual average of weekly data from the
perimeter monitors during 1957. (Hart, 1958)
Intenm-23 Process (1954 — 1958)
The Interim-23 Process (INT-23) was developed to isolate Uranium-233 alone from
thorium and associated fission products INT-23 was used to isolate kilogram
V-13
quantities of Uranium-233 for weapons applications from Hanford irradiated slugs.
The goal of the process was to recover U-233 with very little U-232 (<5ppm)
(ChemRisk, 1997)
Fluoride Volatility Process (1958 — 1968)
The fluoride volatility process was developed to take advantage of the high volatility
of UF6 to separate uranium from less volatile fluoride salts. The process was
developed to recover Uranium-235 from molten salt reactor fuels and from other fuels
soluble in molten salt. The process was used from 1949 — 1968 in Building 3019,
including the reprocessing of molten salt reactor experiment fuel and uranium-
zirconium alloy fuels containing highly enriched uranium.
Kilorod Process (1960 — 1964)
The Kilorod facility was constructed within Building 3019 in the early 1960s to do
development work on the reprocessing and fabrication of fuels containing Thorium
and Uranium-233. This process development work was performed in Cell 4 of
Building 3019. The processing of the fuel in the Kilorod facility involved two
distinct phases —bulk oxide preparation by the sol-gel process and fuel rod
fabrication The fuel rod fabncation included the following steps 1) sizing the bulk
U02-Th02 into an optimum particle size distribution (using crushing operations, ball
mill operations and classifiers) for vibratory compaction, 2) vibratory compaction, 3)
welding of the final end closure, 4) fuel rod decontamination, and 5) fuel rod
inspection. Mockups of various parts of the process were designed in Building 4508.
Cold runs using depleted Uranium were conducted to determine the adequacy of the
process. A total of 37 kilograms of Uranium-233 was recovered during theKilorod
program. 1100 fuels rods charged with 3% Uranium-23302- 97% Th02. (Sease,
1964)
Head End Processes (1955 — 1976) (ChemRisk, 1997)
Shear Leach Process
The Shear Leach Process consistsof shearing stainless steel or Zircaloy clad tubular
U02 bearing fuel elements and leaching the U02 from the sheared fuel tube with
nitric acid in preparation for solvent extraction.
Darex Process
The Darex process was developed for stainless steel-jacketed fuels and used a mixture
of boiling hydrochloric and nitric acid (aqua regia) to dissolve the stainless steel
jacket.
V-14
Sulfex Process
An alternate process for stainless steel-jacketed fuels was the Sulfex process that
dissolved the stainless steel jacket in sulfuric acid and the fuel materials in nitric acid.
This was only run on a pilot scale at ORNL.
Zirfiex Process
Zirfiex was a similar process as Sulfex for Zirconium jacketed fuel using ammonium
fluorideammonium nitrate solution to dissolve the zirconium jacket followed by nitric
acid dissolution of the core. Such procedures were especially applicable to fuels with
uranium and thorium oxide cores.
Feed Materials Processing (1953 — 1959)
Excer Process
The uranyl nitrate product of solvent extraction processes (Redox, Purex) is converted
to UF4 in preparation for gaseous diffusion recycle as UF6. This was usually
accomplished by costly reduction with hydrogen and HF. The Excer process
involved aqueous phase hydrofluorination of uranium to UF4. A modification, the
Excer Moving Bed Process, for converting uranyl nitrate to IJF4 consisted of
denitration of the uranyl nitrate to U03, reduction to U02, and hydrofluorination to
UF4.
Fluorox Process
The Fluorox process involved reaction of UF4 with oxygen to produce UF6 and
uranyl fluoride.
Metallex Process
The Metallex process for conversion of thorium tetrachloride to thorium metal ingots
involves dissolving thorium tetrachloride in anhydrous propylene diamine (PDA) and
reducing the thorium by contact with sodium or lithium amalgam. A button of
thorium metal is formed by filtering, cold pressing, and melting the metallic product.
Raw materials Processing
The discovery that certain solvents and reagents could extract uranium from the
sulfate solutions that were used to leach uranium from ores was an important
technological achievement. The Dapex process used dialkyl phosphoric acid for both
uranium and vanadium recovery. The Amex process uses a long-chain alkyl amine
for uranium recovery. The Monex process used TBP to extract thorium from process
sludge and leach. The Slurrex process was developed in 1950 when the AEC
requested ORNL to make a preliminary evaluation of various solvents for recovery
V-15
and purification of uranium from ore concentrates. Ethyl ether had been used for this
process in the past. The Slurrex process using TBP was developed by ORNL in
collaboration with Mallinckrodt Chemical Works and the Catalytic Construction
Company. The process consisted of extraction of nitric acid slurries of uranium ore
with 30% TBP, scrubbing with hot water, and stripping the uranium with equal
volumes of hot water. This process was used on a production level at Fernald.
3019 Primary Exposures
The primary exposures for this building included: Hydraulic fluids, Internal
radiation, External Radiation, Fluorides, IJF6, HF, Beryllium, Heat, Asbestos, PCBs,
Nitric Acid, Aluminum Nitrate, TBP, Amsco (Kerosene), Plutonium, Thorium, liEU,
and Uranium-233.
According to risk mapping participants in 1959 three of the worst accidents at ORNL
were in 3019: explosion, Ruthenium exposure, and explosion resulting in release of
plutonium. Additionally, H&S reports reviewed indicate that Building 3019 had the
majority of the reported occurrences on the X-10 site for the years from 1960 — 1964
(see Appendix D).
5.10 Central Machine Shop ("Bee Bee Shop") (1947 —1961)
Building Description
Building 3024 was the general machine shop before building 2525 was built. The
building was intended to be a clean shop but reportedly got more and more
contaminated over the years. It was nicknamed the "Bee Bee" shop because of the
work done with lead shot. At the height of operations the shop had about 50 people
working there.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported for the building included: Lead, internal radiation,
external radiation, Noise, welding fumes, mercury, solvents, and beryllium (small
amount). (Risk Mapping and Bingham, 1997)
5.11 3026 C By-product Process Building and Chemistry Separation Lab (1943
Building Description
One primary process that was conducted in Building 3026 was the separation of
radioactive lanthanum from irradiated fuel. Radioactive Lanthanum-140 was used in
weapons test devices in order to characterize the movements of parts after the
explosion through the monitoring of the very intense gamma radiation from the
Lanthanum. The Radioactive Lanthanum (RaLa) process involved large quantities of
irradiated fuel in which radioactive fission products had been allowed to decay for
V-16
only a short period of time. The processing also initially took place at a time when
radioactive gases that were released were not efficiently trapped.
The irradiated uranium slugs would be transferred to the 706-D (later 3026) dissolver
approximately 1-5 days after irradiation. Based on 150 pounds of slugs in a
dissolving batch, one reference indicates that 2500 curies of Xenon-133, 1300 curies
of Iodine-131, and less than 1 curie of Krypton-85 were released within the dissolver.
RaLa runs typically involved batches of approximately 50 slugs at a time with
production runs up to 1500 slugs. A production process was developed and put into
place in Building 706-C where existing lab facilities were converted to the RaLa
production process. In all, nine shipments to Los Alamos were made by 1945,
totaling 3852 curies produced with the 706-C equipment which was designed for only
small-scale (1-10 curies) separation. (Thompson, 1949)
Building 706-D was expanded to allow for increased production requirements.
Separation operations in 706-D started in May of 1945 and by 1949 shipment to Los
Alamos included over 62,000 curies of Barium-140. Production levels steadily
increased from 1949 to 1954 with batch runs in 1954 resulting in as high as 64,000
curies of Barium-140. Over the approximate 12 years of operation ONRL workers
dissolved at least 30,000 slugs in the process of separating over 500,000 curies of
radioactive barium-lanthanum for Los Alamos weapons development and research
projects. In 1954, after an incident at ORNL resulted in an airborne release, the RaLa
operation was re-established in Idaho Falls, Idaho.
The RaLa process was very unpredictable. Because of inherent uncertainties in the
operating procedure it was impossible to maintain a fixed production schedule or
even to determine in advance exactly what materials would be required in the
processing of a run. (Thompson, 1949)
In addition to the RaLa process this building was the primary building for fission
product separation work.
Primary Exposures
The primary exposures identified for this building include: short decay fission
products, external radiation, internal radiation, coolant, NaK, Sodium Hydroxide, and
asbestos.
5.12 3028 Alpha Powder Facility (Curium Source Fabrication Facility) (3028E)
and Short Lived Fission Product Facility (3028W)
Building 3028 was constructed in 1950 to separate the short-lived fission products
from irradiated uranium-aluminum targets, using a concrete shielded manipulator cell
on the ground floor. Labs were provided on the 2nd 3rd and 4th floors. The building
was later expanded by the addition of a single-story wing on the east side to house the
alpha powder handling operations. The building was used to process curie quantities
V-17
of short lived fission products and to package and distribute gram quantities of alpha
materials such as oxides of Americium-241 and 243, Curium-244, Neptunium-237
and Plutonium-238. 3028-B Hot Cells (1-4) were highly contaminated with alpha
contamination with levels reported to be 1E6 -> 1E7 dpmIlOO cm2 (Schaich, 1964).
Primary exposures
Primary exposures reported during risk mapping sessions included: Curium-244,
Strontium-90, Cesium-137, and Cobalt-60 Other radionuclides of interest include
Short Lived Fission Products (Xenon-133, Iodine-131, Molybdenum-99, Zirconium-
95, Tellurium-132, Ruthenium-103), Amencium-241,243, Curium-242, Neptunium-
237, Plutonium-238, 239 240, 241, 242, Uranium-232, 233, 235 236 (Schaich,
1964, 1970)
5.13 3029-3038 Radioisotope Area (1951) (Goldsmith, 1987, 1988)
3029 Source Development Laboratory
Building 3029 was constructed to perform the chemical and mechanical processing of
numerous radioisotopes into radiation sources. The SDL was used to prepare sources
of Strontium-90, Cesium- 137, Promethium- 147, Cobalt-60, Iridium- 192, Iodine- 131,
Technetium-99, Calcium-47 and short lived radioisotopes. A subterranean Cobalt-60
storage and irradiation facility (Cobalt-60 Garden) is used to store Cobalt-60 and to
irradiate specimens with high gamma fluxes. Chemical, physical, and mechanical
processing of radioactive materials is conducted in four manipulator hot cells, two
laboratory hoods used as glove boxes and small glove boxes.
3030, 3031, 3032 Radioisotope Development Lab
The RDL are located in three separate single-story buildings (3030, 3031, 3032). The
labs were constructed to perform limited production and development work with
radioisotope materials used for industrial, medical and research applications.
The hot cell in Building 3030 is used to process irradiated cyclotron and reactor
targets to produce numerous unique radioisotopes, such as: 1) Cobalt-56 recovery
from an iron target, 2) Cobalt-57 from a Nickel cyclotron target, 3) preparation of
purified Gold-198 solution, 4) separation of Neptunium-234 from a uranium target,
5) preparation of purified Strontium-90 nitrate, and purification of Uranium-237.
The hot cell in Building 3031 is used in the final separation of gadolinium from
contaminated Europium targets. The Gadolinium-153 is used for nuclear medicine.
Building 3032 was a hooded laboratory operation where only low-level radioisotope
production technology research and development activities were conducted.
v-i 8
Building 3033A Actinide Fabrication Laboratory (AFL)
Building 3033 Annex was constructed in 1960 by bridging the space between
Buildings 3033 and 3034. Until 1973 a portion of the building was used in the
production of Carbon-14. The facility was later used to produce, load, weld, and
decontaminate neutron dosimeters and to weigh and package milligram to gram
quantities of actinide materials. The facility was also used to fabricate ceramic oxide
wire.
3036 Decontamination Building (1951)
Building Description
One of the primary tasks performed in this building was the decontamination of lead
which was subsequently sent it to lead shop (building 7005). Decontaminated lead
bricks by dipping in nitric acid. Risk mapping participants mentioned that the "HPs
were coming up with high lead levels in their medical montirong".
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: Lead, Nitric Acid, external radiation, internal
radiation.
3038 Alpha Handling Facility (AHF) and Isotope Research Materials Lab
(IRML)
The Isotopes Alpha Handling Facility was used for studying the physical and
chemical characteristics of transuranium elements, fabrication of alpha and neutron
emitting targets and sources, and fabrication of beta and low-energy gamma sources.
Building 3038 was constructed in 1948 to house all the radioisotope shipping
activities for ORNL In the original configuration, the entire facility was dedicated to
packaging, testing, shipping and receiving of all radioactive materials handled at
ORNL The east portion of the building was used as an analytical lab to perform
local analysis of short-lived radioisotopes prior to shipment. The central portion of
the building contained the concrete barricade for the storage of liquid and solid
radioactive materials, a pipetting station for the transfer of liquids, the canning
station, a material transfer system, a remote manipulator, and overhead mirrors to
provide observation behind the barricade. The west area was used for packaging,
labeling, and inspection.
By the late 1960s the volume of isotope shipping had decreased and the west portion
was converted to the Alpha Handling Facility. The AHF used five water shielded,
manipulator cells to handle alpha and neutron emitters and three glove boxes used to
fabricate alpha targets and sources. A separate glove box room (AHF annex) was
used to weigh, package and weld capsules of actinide materials. (Schaich, 1970)
v-i 9
• Primary Exposures
Primary exposures of concern for the Isotope Circle facilities reported during risk
mapping sessions included: Internal radiation, External radiation, Iodine-131,
Technetium-99rn, Strontium-90, Cesium- 137, Molybdenum, Rutheni urn- 106, and
tritium. Other sources indicated other radionuclidçs of interest including:
Califomium-252, Curium-242, 244, Plutronium-238, Americium-241, 243, Uranium-
232.
5.14 3042 ORR (1958 — 1987)
Building Description
The Oak Ridge Research Reactor (ORRR) combined the features of the MTR and the
swimming pool reactor. It was cooled and moderated by water, with beryllium and
water providing the necessary neutron reflection. It used uranium aluminum alloy
fuel in a core that was cooled with high velocity water. The entire core tank was
immersed in a water pooi. The ORRR had beam ports extending through the concrete
pooi and also had the ability to do experiments in the water in close proximity to the
core to attain high neutron fluxes. In addition to mteria1 and solid state physics
experiments the ORRR was used for radionuclide production to produce
radionuclides for use in research or medical applications. (ChemRisk, 1997)
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: External radiation, internal radiation, fission
products, and beryllium.
5.15 3044 Special Materials Machine Shop ("Hot" Machine Shop) (1955)
Building Description
Made fuel elements at this facility. Worked with uranium, beryllium, thorium,
fiberglass and lots of graphite. This building reportedly had more restrictive PPE
requirements than the 2525 machine shop. Risk mapping participants reported that
they did "time controlled" machining to control doses. Helpers were part of the
regular workforce and did the cleaning of the machines The workforce consisted of
approximately 25-30 machinists and helpers.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported during risk mapping included: External radiation,
skin/hand radiation exposures, internal radiation, beryllium, thorium, uranium, and
fiberglass.
V-20
5.16 3047 Radioisotope Development Laboratory (RDL)
Building Description
Building 3047 was constructed in 1962 to conduct researchand development and to
produce radioisotope materials. The facility had the followingentities: several
general-purpose labs for the handling of low-level radioactivematerials, four shielded
manipulator hot cells for high-level beta-gamma activity processing,three alpha-
handling labs with one decontamination room, ten offices, a change room and storage
and service areas.
The four manipulator cells (Cells A, B, C, and D) located in the center of the first
floor were used for high-level beta/gamma activities processing. These hot cells are
equipped with dual, parallel HEPA filters in the rear of eachcell. Access to change
these filters exposed personnel to about 600 mr/hour fields (with filter changes taking
approximately 20-30 minutes). (Goldsmith, 1987) It should benoted that for the
most part manipulators used in hot cells throughout the ORNL wereworked on in the
Manipulator shop (Building 3074).
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported during risk mapping sessionsincluded: Irridium,
Strontium, Cesium, Cobalt, Tritium, Curium, External Radiation, and Internal
Radiation.
5.17 3503 High Radiation Level Chemical Laboratory (1948 (originally706-
HB,-HD)
In the 1950s this lab was used for chemical engineering studies of radiochemical
processes involving evaporation, solventextraction and ion-exchange and continued
unit operation scale studies of the TBP process and the RaLa process.
Research work on the Interim-23 Process (INT-23), developed to isolate Uranium-
233 alone from thorium and associated fission products, was also performed in this
building. INT-23 was used to isolate kilogram quantities ofUranium-233 for
weapons applications from Hanford irradiated slugs.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: Mercury (support work forY-12 operations),
TBP, Thorium, chlorinated solvents, Uranium-233, Plutonium, Strontium-90,
Cesium-137, and Cobalt-60.
V-21
5.18 3505 Reactor Fuels. Processing Plant, Metals Plant (1951)
Process Description
The facility consists of seven process cells (A thru G), a canal, a dissolver room, a
dissolver pit, an office, locker room, storage area, control room, electrical gallery,
shop, and makeup area.
The Tributyl phosphate (TBP) process was developed in 1949 for the recovery and
purification of uranium from the metal-bearing wastes that had accumulatedin the
ORNL tank farm from wartime processing efforts. The process used TBP as a
solvent for extracting uranium and was later modified to also recover plutonium. A
Metal Recovery Facility (Building 3505) was constructed at ORNL to use the TBP
process to recover uranium and plutonium from fission productwaste solutions
collected in the tank farm system at the ORNL. In operation since 1953 the Metals
Recovery Facility also recovered uranium and plutonium from fuel from theChalk
River reactor, Hanford metallurgical waste, the Brookhaven National Laboratory
reactor, Argonne Labs CP-2 and CP-3 reactors, and 7.8 tons of sand contaminated by
weapons tests in Nevada. (Thompson, 1963, ChemRisk, 1997)
Metal recovery processing of Hanford metallurgical wastes for recovery of plutonium
and americium began in 1954. In the first quarter of operation the process yielded
over 18 kg of plutonium. (Brooksbank)
Metal recovery also recovered 127 grams of Neptunium-237 and 6.7 tons of uranium
from 11.2 tons of the nonvolatile fluoride 'ash' resulting from fluorination of U03 to
UF6 at Paducah. (Brooksbank)
In 1958 the Metal Recovery Plant was linked by underground piping to the Pilot Plant
(Building 3019) to form what became known as the Power Reactor Fuel Processing
(PRFP) complex.
The PUREX process (Plutonium Uranium Reduction Extraction Process) was
developed on a pilot scale starting in 1949. The Purex process used solvent
extraction with tributyl phosphate (TBP) in Varsol (organic diluent) and nitric acid as
a salting agent. They also experimented with TBP in Amsco 123-15 hydrocarbon
diluent (kerosene). The uranium was isolated as UNH and after an ion exchange
process the Plutonium was isolated as Plutonium nitrate (Pu(N03)4). In addition to
isolating plutonium and uranium, the Purex process also isolated fission product
isotopes of zirconium, niobium, and ruthenium (by distilling off the nitric acid for re-
use).
In addition to the purex process ORNL also developed an ian-exchange plutonium
isolation method and a process for recovering plutonium from metallurgical wastes.
V-22
In 195 1-1953 the Purex process was conducted on a continuous process (rather than
batch processing) with a total of 34 runs being conducted (each run with
approximately 140 slugs (—250 kg)). The Purex process was subsequently run in full-
scale operation at the Hanford facility.
Risk mapping participants indicated that building 3505 and 3019 were 'direct
maintenance' facilities indicating that the cells were not designed to be maintained
remotely. This was also discussed in a technical presentation. (Bruce, 1960)
According to health and safety reports the exposure of maintenance men to
radioactivity in 7 years of operation averaged 60 mremlweek (approximately 3
Rem/year). (Genung, 1993, ORNL-6846)
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Uranium-23 8, Plutonium-239, Neptunium-237,
Americium-241, Internal radiation, External radiation, heat, Nitric acid, Aluminum
Nitrate, TBP, Amsco (kerosene), U-233, and U-235.
5.19 3508 Chemical Technology Alpha Lab
Building Description
The building was designed for high level alpha materials and low level beta and
gamma materials and acted as both a development andservice lab. First floor
facilities included: Lab 1 Low level alpha development lab, Lab 2 —High level
alpha development lab, Lab 3 — Low level analytical lab, and Lab 4 —High level
alpha lab. One process performed in the labs was the purification of different alpha-
emitting radioactive materials including: Americium-24 1, Neptunium-237, and
Plutonium.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Americium-241, Neptunium-237, Plutonium,
Uranium-233, Curium-242, solvents and chlorinated solvents.
5.20 3515 Fission Product Pilot Plant
Building Description
This building was built in 1948 and was modified throughout its operational life. The
original facility consisted of a concrete pad with tanks and a tent surrounding the
shield blocks. In 1950 a hot cell was added. Lean-to buildings contained the
operating areas and a small valve pit was on the north side of the building. This
building was used to extract radioisotopes of ruthenium, strontium, cesium, cerium,
and other elements from the ORNL liquid wastes and the Chalk River Canada clean-
V-23
up wastes. Past operations in this facility resulted in severe contamination of the
interior surfaces due primarily to a practice of intentionally overflowing the piping
and vessels with purge liquids for decontamination to allow entry for work This
building was shut down in 1976 but required continued surveillance and maintenance
until eventual D&D in 2003. (ORNL 1995)
According to risk mapping participants management had tried to decontaminate this
building in the past and the result was "burning out a bunch of people just trying to
start the cleanup operations".
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: External Radiation, fission products, and
Internal radiation.
5.21 3517 Fission Product Development Laboratory (1958 — 1988)
Building Description
Building 3517 is a concrete block and corrugated aluminum sided structure. The
building includes 15 cells shielded with concrete walls. In addition, there are four
cells, outside the main cell block, shielded with steel or concrete.
Aqueous feed materials containing mixed fission products is concentrated by
evaporation, and the fission products are then separated into groups of chemically
related elements by inorganic precipitation. These purified fission products are
converted to a dried powder, which is pressed into pellets for insertion into
containers The containers are sealed by welding and shipped to the customer for use
as a source of radiation or heat.
This lab worked primarily on the concentration, isolation and separation of fission
products from aqueous waste streams. The building houses large quantities of Sr-90
and Cs-137. Risk mapping participants reported that there was an accident resulting
in a severe hand dose from Strontiurn-90. The workforce consisted of four shifts
through the 1970s and then cut back to 3 shifts in the 80's
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Transuranics, Cesium-137, Cerium-144, and
Strontium-90. Other sources indicated other exposures of interest including: Fission
Products, Cerium- 144, Strontium-90 (200,000 Ci/campaign), Promithium- 147,
Cesium- 137 (200,000 Ci/campaign), Ruthenium- 106, Zirconium-95, Niobium-95,
Plutonium-239, Uranium-23 5,238, and Americium-24 1. (Schaich, 1964)
V-24
5.22 3525 High Radiation Level Examination Laboratory (1963 —
BuildingDescription
This facility contained both Hot cells and radiation laboratories.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: Strontium-90, Cesium-137, Cobalt-60, HEU,
Uranium-233 and asbestos.
5.23 3550 Chemistry Laboratory (1943) (originally 706-A)
Building Description
This building housed some of the early research and bench scale work on fluoride
volatility process (40s to early 50s). In addition to bench scale and pilot level
research activities the facility all had a small machine shop.
Primary Exposures
The primary exposures reported include: External radiation, Internal radiation,
Plutonium, Curium, beryllium, HF, acids and solvents.
5.24 4500N & S Central Research Building (North 1951) (South 1962)
Building Description
These facilities performed general research including radiation research, fuel
reprocessing work, research for the Molten salt reactor, research work on fluoride
volatility process, etc.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: Uranium, Transuranics, fission products, acids,
solvents
5.25 4501 High Level Radiochemical Laboratory (1951)
Building Description
Research in this facility included: early fission product release test work and OREX
research. Building 4501 had unpleasant odor in late 50's and early 60's related to the
use of propylene diamine (PDA) used in the OREX process. According to a group
interview with Division Safety Officers "Mercury was used in large quantities in this
building". Similar work was reported in building 3592.
V-25
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: Mercury, Propylene Diamine (PDA), Iodine,
Cesium, HEU, Uranium-233, plutonium, and transuranics.
5.26 4507 High Radiation Level Chemical Development Lab (1958
Building Description
Processed irradiated pellets of Americium Oxide and aluminum to recover a purified
solution of americium and curium. U-232 was prepared by irradiating Pa-23 1. The
irradiated material was processed in Building 4507to produce various products
containing known amounts of U-232, U-233, and U-235.
The building was also named the Curium Recovery Facility recovering both Cm-244
and Cm-242. Other research in the lab included: pilot studies of the fluoride
volatility process (4507 cell 4), Head End unit level studies on several processes
including: Darex, Zircex, Zirfiex, and Sulfex.
The Building closed down operations in the 70s and was decontaminated in the 80s.
According to risk mapping attendees "over the years had several good sized
contamination accidents".
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Plutonium, Americium, Uranium, Curium,
Thorium, Tramax, Krypton, Iodine, Nitric acid, and Sulfuric acid.
5.27 7012 Central Machine Shop (1953)
This machine shop was reportedly a "clean" shop (not receiving contaminated parts
or radioactive metals). In addition to machining the building housed sheet metal
work, and pipefitters. This was a High Bay facility that allowed for fairly large- scale
fabrication for mock-up pilot equipment.
5.28 7500 Homogeneous Reactor Experiment Building (1951)
Building Description
Homogenous Reactor Experiment (1951 — 1954)
The homogeneous reactor was called such because it combined fuel, moderator, and
coolant in one water-based solution. Homogeneous reactors had been tried earlier but
had been stopped due to technical problems including problems with corrosion. The
HRE building was completed in 1951 and achieved a one megawatt power level in
V-26
1953. High-pressure steam from the reactor was fed to a turbine/generator to
generate electricity. (Genung, 1993)
Homogenous Reactor Test (HRE-II) (1954 — 1961)
The HRE-ll reactor was designed as a two-region homogenous reactor core. The aim
was not only to produce electrical power but also to irradiate thorium surrounding the
core to produce fissionable Uranium-233. The reactor had many technical problems
during its short pilot period with the longest continuous running period of
approximately 100 days achieved in 1958.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: External radiation, neutron exposure,
5.29 7503 Reactor Experiments Building (ARE) (1952 — 1957)
Building Description
Molten Salt Reactor (1960)
Based on the success of the molten-salt ANPreactor (which was a small, high
temperature reactor engine that used circulating molten uranium salts as fuel) the
ORNL began to further investigate the usefulness of the technology The Molten Salt
Reactor (MSR) was built as a thermal breeder reactor with a molten salt Uranium-235
reactor surrounded with a blanket of 'fertile' (materials that can be transformed by
neutron absorption to fissionable materials) Thorium-232 contained in a molten
mixture. The Thorium-232 was transformed by neutron absorption to fissionable
Uranium-233. The fuel for this type of reactor was Uranium-233F4 dissolved in a
molten mixture (solution) of Lithium Fluoride (Li-7) and Beryllium Fluoride (BeF2).
The fertile material was ThF4 dissolved in the same salt or in a separate salt of similar
composition. (Genung, 1993, Stapleton, 1993)
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported include: Beryllium, uranium, thorium, external radiation,
and internal radiation.
5.30 7702 Tower Shielding Facility (includes TSR-i and TSR-I! reactor (1954-
1993)
Building Description
The Tower Shielding Facility was designed to allow operating reactors to be hoisted
nearly 200 feet in the air to enable studies of the behavior of radiations from airborne
V-27
reactors without the scattering that took place on the ground. The facility had four
different reactor assemblies over its period of operation.
5.31 7709 Health Physics Research Reactor (HPRR) (1960 — 1987)
Building Description
The IIPPR was designed to be a fast burst reactor. It was a small, unmoderated,
unshielded reactor that released short bursts of neutrons ideal for health physics and
biomedical research. The small HPPR, housed in the Dosimetry Applications
Research Facility (DOSAR), was contained in a steel structure, aluminum sided
building which is supported by a large, track mounted positioning device. The
reactor building is located in a hollow and is surrounded by hills at least 50 feet high
to provide natural shielding and to prevent 'line of sight' viewing of the reactor in any
direction, The support building was located behind the hill approximately 900 feet
from the reactor. The reactor had been operated 3000 times in the steady state mode
and 1000 times in the pulse mode.
5.32 7852 Hydrofracture Facility
Building Description
This facility was constructed as a pilot plant to demonstrate the feasibility of
permanent disposal of liquid radioactive waste in impermeable shale formations by
hydrofracture methods. This facility was used from 1964 to 1979 with a total of 26
waste injections made during that time period.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: External radiation and Internal radiation.
5.33 7860 New Hydrofracture Facility
Building Description
This facility began operations in 1982. It was designed to inject 140,000 gallons of
grout per injection. Injections were terminated in 1984 when questions arose about
possible leaching to deep groundwater.
5.34 7900 High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR) (1961)
Building Description
The HFIR was a 100 megawatt flux-trap type reactor in which neutrons are 'trapped'
in a five inch diameter hole in the center of the highly-enriched Uranium-235 hEIR
fuel region. Targets, including Curium-244 and other transuranic radionuclides, were
V-28
placed in the trap region for intense thermal (moderated) neutron bombardment in
order to form transurnaic radionuclides including Berkehum-249, Californium-252,
Einsteinium-253, and Fermium-257. In addition to production of transuranic
radionculides, the HFIR has been used for many irradiation experiments using
facilities that allow insertion of samples into the flux trap region, into the region of
the beryllium reflector, and using beam tubes that allow neutrons to be beamed out to
experimental facilities outside the reactor shielding. (Genung, 1993, Stapelton, 1993)
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: External radiation, neutron exposure,
transuranics,
5.35 7920 Transuranium Processing Plant (TRU)
Building Description
Came about due to the need for transuranic isotopes such as berkelium, californium,
and einsteinium. The first hot processing was completed in the TRU facility (now
REDC) in November 1966. 10's to 100's or milligrams of Californium-252 were
recovered during each campaign (this material was sent to ANt and SRS). The
building included 12 hot cells and 12 laboratories. The facility fabricated targets for
the HFIR and processed targets after irradiation in BIFIR to recover the isotope of
interest Also did research on the Purex process to help determine the effectiveness
of this process on very high burnup fuels. The Solvent Extraction Test facility (Purex
testing) was located in Cell 5 and Tank pit 5.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Pu-240, Pu-242, Am-243, Cm-
244 ,245,246,248, Cf-252, Bk-249, Es-253, and Fm-257, external radiation, and
internal radiation.
5.36 7930 Thorium-Uranium Recycle Facility (TURF)
Building Description
Designed to process fuels from advanced reactors. One process which was designed
to take graphite coated microshperes from pebble bed reactors and recover fuel
however, the process was never built. Eventually used for some transuranic work
(Plutonium, Curium, and Americium). Risk mapping participants incidcated that the
cells were "generally clean" because the facility had limited use.
There was a tunnel between 7920 and 7930 with a conveyor system which the risk
mapping participants indicated was highly contaminated with Curium.
V-29
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Plutonium, Curium, and Americium.
5.37 ORNL Buildings at Y-12
Several Y-12 Buildings were transferred to ORNL after the original work on Uranium
separation. Some of the primary work conducted in these facilities included stable
isotope production work. The ORNL buildings at Y-12 of interest with regard to
worker exposure included: 9201-2 Thermonuclear (from Y-12 1951), 9201-3
Reactor Design and Engineer Development (from Y-12 1950), 9204-1 Reactor
Experimental Engineering (from Y-12 1950), 9204-3 Electronuclear Building (from
Y-12 in 1951), 9213 Criticality Lab, 9207,9210 Biology Research Facilities (from
Y-12 in 1947), 9731 Stable Isotope Separation (from Y-12 in 1951), and the 9995
Lab (risk mapping participants felt that this facility had high chemical exposures).
5.38 Other X-10 Buildings
Other buildings on the site which were not included in the Risk Mapping activities
but which may be of interest with regard to potential exposures include: Interim Low
Level Facility (907), Metallurgy Labs (2000), Health Physics Labs (2003), Physics
Laboratory (2005), Health Physics Test Building (2007), Health Physics Low Level
Analysis Lab (2008), Medical and Biological Building (2013), Metallurgy
Laboratory Annex (2024), Instrument Shop (2506), Decontamination Laundry
(2523),
6.0 Y-12 Major Operations and Buildings
6.1 Primary Processes in Alpha and Beta Buildings
The Electromagnetic Separation Process
The initial mission of the Y-12 facility was the separation and enrichment of Uranium-
235. This was done in cyclotron like equipment that operated much like a mass
spectrometer, using electromagnetic separation to isolate isotopes of interest. The units
were called calutrons. The calutrons operating principals are basically as follows: atoms
or groups of atoms are ionized and accelerated to a given electrical potential, the
acceleration is stopped and then introduced into a magnetic field through which they
move at a velocity which is a function of their mass and charge. Ions are then collected
at locations that can be predicted on the basis of their size and charge.
The calutron separation operation was done in two primary type of calutrons: Alpha
calutrons and Beta calutrons. The alpha calutrons were the larger units and used for the
initital enrichment and the beta calutrons were the units used for "topping" or bringing a
slightly enriched feed material to an enrichment suitable for the end use.
V-30
The electromagnetic plant itself was a major instillation. At its peak it employed 24,000
(50,000 indicated in abstract of same reference) workers Eventually the plant came to
contain five alpha enrichment buildings (20% U-235) and four Beta buildings (90+% U-
235). Calutrons were generally arranged in continuous, oval or rectangular,
arrangements, called "racetracks" Each alpha track consisted of 96 calutron tanks with
electromagnets between, arranged in an oval (alpha-i) or rectangle (alpha-2). The center
area of the alpha-i racetracks was large enough to be used as office space by a number of
staff members The beta tracks consisted of 36 units each, in the form of an rectangle
with a large metal "magnet keeper" across the ends The beta units were considerably
smaller than the alpha units since they were designed as a second stage to utilize the
smaller amount of product from the alpha units as a pre-enriched feed.
Each group of calutrons was used as a pilot plant for succeeding generations. The alpha
calutrons were primarily in two models, the alpha-i units and alpha-2 units. The alpha-i
unit had two ion sources, and the alpha-2 unit, four ion sources, permitting much greater
throughput. These are also referred to as two and four arc machines. The beta calutrons
had two ion sources.
The 24,000 employees consisted of the following job groups: administrative staff,
support staff, calutron operators, calutron chemical recycle operators, machinists,
construction staff, and scientific research staff. It was noted that "a small fraction of
Electromagnetic Plant staff, mostly restricted to the scientific staff, knew that the Clinton
Engineer Works was producing material for use in weapons until after the actual
Hiroshima explosion" (Compere, 199i)
The Electromagnetic Plant Uranium-235 operations were very short lived. In late 1944
the Thermal Diffusion Plant (S-SO) began supplying low level enriched feed for alpha
calutron enrichment. By the summer of 1945, the Gaseous Diffusion process began to be
effective enough to gradually replace the alpha separations, resulting in the closure of the
alpha stage separation in September 1945. Thermal diffusion, like alpha separations, was
also discontinued. The Beta stage of the Electromagnetic Plant was operated as a topping
operation for the Gaseous Diffusion Plant through the end of 1946. In December of 1946
all enrichment was moved to the Gaseous
jn P1ant and all the calutron operations
were closed with the exception of one track of 36 beta calutrons and the two experimental
calutrons (XAX and XBX in Building 9731). (Compere, 1991)
Uranium recovery from Calutrons
Enriched uranium salvage and recycle chemistry was essentially a small batch operation,
for reasons of criticality. Operations were divided into several phases, which included
calutron dismantling and washing, calutron component salvage, housekeeping salvage,
uranium purification, chlorination, and hexafluoride conversion.
In alpha recycle, peroxide precipitation, followed by filtration, was the major method of
purification In the calutron process for uranium enrichment, at best only 20% of the
charge material reached the receiver; the rest of the ionized uranium halide vapor had to
V-31
be recovered from wherever it settled and condensed in whatever chemical form it
eventually took.
The calutron liner ("L" unit), ion source ("M" unit), and receiver ("E" unit) contained a
variety of uranium compounds, including tetrachloride, oxychloride, carbides and oxides,
as well as the metal. These materials were in the forms of loose powder, hard surface
deposits, and deposits in relatively inaccessible areas, such as filament holders and
porous graphite surfaces. Operations to recover uranium from the linerincluded vacuum
cleaning and concentrated nitric acid leaching along with physical methods (brushing,
grinding, scraping, etc.) and high velocity high volume spray washing. The nitrate
solutions generated from these collection operations together with salvage and
reclamation from laundry, plant cleanup operations, and floor drains, were a significant
uranium stream. Compere, et al note that "Laundry pre-washing was an important
uranium salvage operation". (Compere, 1991)
Uranium Concentration and Purification
A variety of processes were used to purify and concentrate the material recovered from
the calutron process so that it could be oxidized, chlorinated, and returned to the
calutrons. Almost all operations were batch or semi-batch due to concerns over
criticality. This did, however, allow continuous modification of the chemical purification
methods. Generally the methods were as follows: evaporation, extraction preparation,
solvent extraction (solvents included ether and dibutoxy-diethylene glycol —'carbitol'),
peroxide precipitation, calcinations, reduction to the U+4 valence state using alcohol
vapor, and chlorination with carbon tetrachloride. At the end of the chlorination stagethe
carbon tetrachioride was turned off and nitrogen was passed through the reaction vessel
to purge the phosgene. The workforce and primary chemical exposures for various
processes are identified within the table below. (Compere, 1991)
V-32
Workforce for Uranium Concentration and Purification
Process
Avg. # of
Workers
Primary Chemical Exposures
UF6 Feed
7
Ammonium Hydroxide, Aluminum Nitrate, Hydrogen
Peroxide, Aerosol OT, Uranium
Recycle Oxide
Preparation
20
Lime, Nitric Acid, Hydrogen Peroxide
Chlorination
38
Alcohol, Carbon Tetrachioride, Sodium Hydroxide
Cleaning
Operations
Nitric Acid, Steam
56
Hydrogen Peroxide, Lime, Nitric Acid
Solution
Processing
Carbon Burning
and Furnacing
15
Heat
Uranium
Leaching
30
Nitric Acid
HF Treatment
9
HF, Aluminum Nitrate, Nitric Acid,
Laundry
7
Sodium Carbonate, Hydrogen Peroxide,
Evaporation
6
Extraction
23
Lime, Nitric Acid, Aluminum Nitrate, Carbitol,
Isotope
Separation
34
18
Nitric Acid
Nitrate
Preparation
Oxide
Preparation
54
Ammonium Hydroxide, Aluminum Nitrate, Nitric Acid,
Hydrogen Peroxide,
13
Nitric Acid
Salvage
Processing
Hydrofluorination
18
HF, Hydrogen,
V-33
Lithium Separation Operations
The separation of lithium isotopes on an industrial scale is based on the fact that, under
certain conditions, the Li-6 isotope will dissolve more readily in mercury than will the Li-
7 isotope Lithium dissolved in mercury solvent is referred to as the lithium amalgam
and will remain in a stable state in contact with an aqueous solution only if an electric
current is applied to the mixture If this current is removed, the amalgam will decompose
and the lithium will react with the water.
If lithium amalgam is allowed to flow in contact with a fluid containing another lithium
compound, the Li-6 atoms will migrate to the amalgam and the Li-7 atoms to the lithium
compound in the fluid. This is "two phase, countercurrent, liquid-liquid exchange". The
most productive compound and fluid used in this isotope separation process is lithium
hydroxide dissolved in water.
In the lithium separation plant, the cascade section provided for countercurrent flow and
intimate contact between the aqueous lithium hydroxide and lithium amalgam. Two
distinct types of cascade systems were used at the Y-12 plant, the Elex process and the
Colex process. The Elex process was the first lithium separation process used on a
production scale (Building 9204-4 —Beta 4). This was followed by the Colex process
which was conducted in 9201-4 (Alpha-4) and 9201-5 (Alpha-5). The production period
took place between August 1953 and May 1963.
The Alpha 5 Colex process incorporated vertical columns, replacing the horizontal trays
of the Elex system. The Li-6 isotope migrated in the direction of the amalgam flow, and
the Li-7 isotope migrated with the aqueous flow. The Alpha-4 Colex plant was brought
on-line in June 1955, soon after the Alpha-S Colex plant.
Some work was done by the ORNL in 195 1-1952 on an organic solvent (DPA) to take
the place of water. This was known as the organic exchange (OREX) process. This was
not pursued past the pilot phase. The Orex pilot plant, Building 9733-1 was located at Y-
12 but operated by ORNL during 1951 and 1952. Building 9202 was also used as a pilot
plant for the Orex process in 1953 — 1954. (Reference: Mercury at Y-12: A study of
Mercury use at the Y-12 Plant, Accountability, and Impacts on Y-12 Workers and the
Environment — 1950 to 1983, The 1983 Mercury Task Force, August, 18, 1983, Y/EX-
24.)
Subsequent to separation the lithium was taken through several fabrication steps to
produce the desired product.
Primary buildings for lithium separation included: Beta-4 (Elex process, 1955-1956),
Alpha-S (Colex, 1955-1959), Alpha-4 (Colex, 1955-1962), 9733-1 (Orex, 1951-1952),
9733-2 (Elex, 1950-195 1), 9202 (Orex Pilot Plant, 1953-1954), Alpha-2 (Elex and Colex
Pilot plants, 195 1-1955) Two other important support buildings were 9720-26 (Mercury
Wharehouse) and 8 1-10 (Roasting Furnace — for recovery of mercury). (Mercury Task
Force, 1983(a), 1983(b)
V-34
Beryllium Operations
Beryllium machining took place in several buildings over time at the Y-12 facility. Two
of the primary buildings that included a great deal of beryllium machining were Alpha-S
and building 9766. Other buildings which have been identified as either being beryllium
controlled areas or areas with beryllium storage or contamination include: Alpha-i,
Alpha-3, 9202, 9733-2, 9215 Third Mill, Beta-4, 9995, and 9998. (DOE, 1973)
According to a 1952 trade journal, 'the material ordinarily processed was hot-pressed
QMV beryllium. Castings were received rough machined with excess stock on plane
surfaces. Operations included surfacing, grooving, deep-hole drilling, facing, and
boring.' (Case, 1955)
The 1952 trade journal also indicated that the IH monitoring included 'twelve permanent
air samplers were installed, one in the locker room, seven in the machining area, one in
the room housing the work-pieces, one in the tool-grinding area, and two in the filter
house on the influent and effluent sides of the finishing filter.' (Case, 1955) An annual
HP program report (Patterson, 1957) also outlines the air sampling and wipe sampling
performed on a routine basis in Building 9766.
6.2 9201-1 Alpha 1
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Alpha 1 Building included Track 1 and 2, Alpha-
1 Calutron operations. Calutron operations are detailed in the above section. After the
calutron operations were terminated the building was converted into a machine and tool
design shop.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Enriched uranium, EIVIF, graphite, beryllium,
external radiation, chlorinated solvents, machining fluids, mercury, and welding fumes.
6.3 9201-2 Alpha 2
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Alpha 2 Building included Track 3 and 4, Alpha-
1 Calutron operations. Calutron operations are detailed in the above section. The Alpha-
2 building housed the pilot plant facilities for the Colex and Elex processes between 1951
to 1955.
V-35
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: EU, EMF, external radiation, mercury, HF,
alcohol, and PCBs.
Participants reported that sulfur was used in the basement to keep down the mercury.
6.4 9201-3 Alpha 3
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Alpha-3 Building included Track 5,Alpha-i/S
Calutron operations. This building also was used for research on the Aircraft Nuclear
Propulsion (ANP) program.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: EU, EMF, mercury and beryllium.
6.5 9201-4Alpha 4
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Alpha-4 Building included Track 6 and 7, Alpha-
2 Calutron operations. The Alpha-4 building also housed the Colex production process
from 1955 through 1962.
Primary Exposures
The primary exposures reported included: EU, EMF, Mercury, Alcohol, asbestos, and
external radiation.
Risk mapping participants reported that this building was among the worst areas for
mercury exposures indicating that "you would even see it on the roof'.
6.6 9201-5 Alpha 5 (E, N, W wings)
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Alpha-S Building included Track 8 and 9, Alpha-
2 Calutron operations. This facility later housed enriched uranium processing and
weapons parts fabrication (including beryllium, lithium, and thorium parts).
The enriched uranium operations included: 1) reduction of UF6 to UF4, 2) reduction of
UF4 to metal, 3) casting or forging, 4) rolling and forming in mill operations, 5)
machining of metals, 6) wet chemistry purification, recycle, and salvage, and 7) UF4
V-36
extraction. Enriched uranium from retired weapons was recovered, usuallyremelted in
an induction furnace, made into a casted part and sent to machining Sometimes,
however, the material was cast into long semi-cylindrical or cylindrical shapes and sent to
a rolling/pressing mill and then on to a machining shop to be turnedand cut to the desired
design specifications.
The 920 1-5 Machine Shop among other materials machined DU, EU, and Beryllium.
This building also had a plating shop. The machine shop had four bays (A-D) and
participants estimated that there were more than 100 machiningtools
According to Risk mapping participants, 9201-SN had an incinerator in whichmuch of
the cyanide waste from plating operations was burned.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Beryllium, Thorium, Mercury, Lithium, EU, EMF,
cyanide, copper, nickel, cadmium, chrome, NaK, alcohol, mineral oil, heat, uranium,
plutonium, freon, perchioroethylene, TCE, noise, lead, Nitric Acid, Sulfuric Acid, Aqua
Regia, and asbestos.
Participants mentioned that machinists were required to eat at their machines throughthe
1980s. They also mentioned that it was very common to have 'chip' fires from
machining uranium and they would just put the fire out (some mentioned using
perchloroethylene to extinguish the fire) and continue to work. The A-wing was
mentioned as the worst area because the low ceilings would not allow for as effective
ventilation.
Participants also mentioned that several people in the plating shop had "cyanide
poisoning" and that operators would often have their "eyes swell shut" from working
over the plating tanks.
6.7 9202 Chemical Building or Development Lab
Building Description
The starting material for the uranium enrichment process was natural uranium in the form
of U03. The U03 was converted to UC14 which was then loaded into charge bottles and
sent to the calutrons for electromagnetic separation. These buildings (9202, 9203, and
9205) were also used for processing the recycled material. This initial processing used
large quantities of carbon tetrachlonde and tons of natural uranium Building 9202 also
worked on development of the Orex process and included other beryllium operations
(machining and processing).
V-37
Primary Exposures
The primary exposures reported included: uranium, carbon tetrachioride, mercury,
beryllium, and perchioroethylene.
6.8 9203 Laboratory
Building Description
The starting material for the uranium enrichment process was natural uranium in the form
of U03. The U03 was converted to UCI4 which was then loaded into charge bottles and
sent to the calutrons for electromagnetic separation These buildings (9202, 9203,and
9205) were also used for processing the recycled material. This initial processingused
large quantities of carbon tetrachioride and tons of natural uranium. Other operations
included: Uranium-235 analysis (mass spec), control analyses, and initial product
processing.
Primary Exposures
The primary exposures reported included: Uranium, Carbon Tetrachloride, mercury,
beryllium, and Perchloroethylene.
6.9 9204-1 Beta 1
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Beta-i Building included Track 1 and 2, Beta
Calutron operations.
Primary Exposures
Primary Exposures reported included: external radiation, internal radiation and beryllium.
6.10 9204-2 Beta 2
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Beta-2 Building included Track 3 and 4, Beta
Calutron operations This facility also housed enriched uranium processing and weapons
parts fabrication (including beryllium, lithium, and thorium parts).
The enriched uranium operations included: 1) reduction of UF6 to UF4, 2) reduction of
UF4 to metal, 3) casting or forging, 4) rolling and forming in mill operations, 5)
machining of metals, 6) wet chemistry purification, recycle, and salvage, and 7)UF4
extraction. Enriched uranium from retired weapons was recovered, usually remelted in
an induction furnace, made into a casted part and sent to machining. Sometimes,
V-38
however, the material was cast into long semi-cylindrical or cylindrical shapes and sent to
a rolling/pressing mill and then on to a machining shop to be turned and cut to thedesired
design specifications.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included external radiation, internal radiation, beryllium
alloy, HEU, Nitric Acid, Mercury, alcohol, and PCBs.
A 1955 air sampling memorandum for the Beta-2 building indicates elevated levels of
alloy with the maximum values of 2,000 — 6,000 ug A1loy/m''3 in the Evaporator area,
the Bird Bath area, and the Knock Out area. The plant maximum permissible level was
set at 35 ug/mA3 basedreportedly on 'comfort level' rather than toxicity.
Risk mapping participants mentioned this building as an area that caused strong lung
irritation and sometimes frequent sneezing. Also, frequently had skin bums from
working in this building.
6.11 9204-2E Beta 2 East
Building Description
This facility housed enriched uranium processing and weapons parts fabrication
(including beryllium, lithium, and thorium parts) and assembly and disassembly work.
The enriched uranium operations included: 1) reduction of UF6to TJF4, 2) reduction of
UF4 to metal, 3) casting or forging, 4) rolling and forming in mill operations, 5)
machining of metals, 6) wet chemistry purification, recycle, and salvage, and 7) UF4
extraction. Enriched uranium from retired weapons was recovered, usually remelted in
an induction furnace, made into a casted part and sent to machining. Sometimes,
however, the material was cast into long semi-cylindrical or cylindrical shapes and sent to
a rolling/pressing mill and then on to a machining shop to be turned and cut to the desired
design specifications.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: beryllium and HEU.
6.12 9204-3 Beta 3
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Beta-3 uilding included Track 5and 6, Beta
Calutron operations. The building also conducted laboratory operations and plutonium
separation work.
V-39
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: EU, external radiation, polonium and plutonium.
6.13 9204-4 Beta 4
Building Description
The primary processes conducted in the Beta-4 Building included Track 7 and 8, Beta
Calutron operations. Beta 4 housed the Elex pilot plant in 1955-1956. Other operations
conducted in this building included: Depleted Uranium Forming, Thorium operations,
plating, lead arc melting, forging, rolling, and milling and machining.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: external radiation, internal radiation, EU, Mercury,
lithium, beryllium, lead, boric acid, stainless steel, Nitric Acid, Sulfuric acid, Sodium
Hydroxide, Nickel Sulfamate, Cadmium, and copper.
6.14 9205 Lab
Building Description
The starting material for the uranium enrichment process was natural uranium in the form
of U03. The U03 was converted to UC14 which was then loaded into charge bottles and
sent to the calutrons for electromagnetic separation. These buildings (9202, 9203, and
9205) were also used for processing the recycled material. This initial processing used
large quantities of carbon tetrachloride and tons of natural uranium. This facility also
conducted Uranium isotope analysis and Beryllium oxide machining.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Uranium, Carbon Tetrachioride, mercury,
beryllium, and Perchioroethylene.
6.15 9206 HEU Chemical Operations
Building Description
This facility was used for Beta chemical recycle and product processing in support of the
calutron operations. This facility housed enriched uranium processing and weapons parts
fabrication (including beryllium, lithium, and thorium parts).
The enriched uranium operations included: 1) reduction of UF6 to UF4,2) reduction of
UF4 to metal, 3) casting or forging, 4) rolling and forming in mill operations, 5)
machining of metals, 6) wet chemistry purification, recycle, and salvage, and 7) UF4
V-40
extraction. Enriched uranium from retired weapons was recovered, usually remelted in
an induction furnace, made into a casted part and sent to machining. Sometimes,
however, the material was cast into long semi-cylindrical or cylindrical shapes and sent to
a rolling/pressing mill and then on to a machining shop to be turned and cut to the desired
design specifications.
Enriched Uranium recovery, purification and recycle operations were performed
primarily in buildings 9206 and 9212. These operations consisted of the following: 1)
burning combustibles, 2) dissolving and leaching solids, and 3) purifying the uranium
bearing solutions by chemical extraction. Generally, purified uranyl nitrate hexahydrate
(UNH) solutions were produced from these operations and then denitrated to uranium
trioxide (U03), which was then reduced to uranium dioxide (U02). The U02 was then
converted to uranium tetrafluoride (UF4) by reaction with gaseous anhydrous hydrogen
fluoride. The UF4 was then reduced under high temperatures to yield uranium metal,
which was cast into the desired form.
Recycled highly enriched uranium (contaminated with fission products and transuranics)
was received from Savannah River, INEEL ICPP and Hanford and processed in buildings
9212 and 9206. Receipt of this material occurred as early as 1953. (DOE, 2001)
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: external radiation, beryllium, EU, and uranium
metal alloys
6.16 9207 Shops, 9208 Maintenance, 9210, 9211, 9220, 9224, and 9769
Building Description
All of these buildings were former ORNL Biology lab buildings.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Radiation, lead, PCBs, beryllium and asbestos.
6.17 9212 HEU Chemical and Metallurgical Building
Building Description
This building was used for the calutron operations Beta Product Processing. This facility
housed enriched uranium processing and weapons parts fabrication (including beryllium,
lithium, and thorium parts).
The enriched uranium operations included: 1) reduction of UF6 to 1JF4, 2) reduction of
UF4 to metal, 3) casting or forging, 4) rolling and forming in mill operations, 5)
machiningof metals, 6) wet chemistry punfication, recycle, and salvage, and 7) UF4
V-41
extraction. Enriched uranium from retired weapons was recovered, usually remelted in
an induction furnace, made into a casted part and sent to machining Sometimes,
however, the material was cast into long semi-cylindrical or cylindrical shapes and sent to
a rolling/pressing mill and then on to a machining shop to be turned and cut to the desired
design specifications.
Enriched Uranium recovery, purification and recycle operations were performed
primarily in buildings 9206 and 9212. These operations consisted of the following: 1)
burning combustibles, 2) dissolving and leaching solids, and 3) purifying the uranium
bearing solutions by chemical extraction. Generally, purified uranyl nitrate hexahydrate
(UNH) solutions were produced from these operations and then denitrated to uranium
trioxide (U03), which was then reduced to uranium dioxide (U02). The U02 was then
converted to uranium tetrafluoride (UF4) by reaction with gaseous anhydrous hydrogen
fluoride. The TJF4 was then reduced under high temperatures to yield uranium metal,
which was cast into the desired form.
Recycled highly enriched uranium (contaminated with fission products and transuranics)
was received from Savannah River, INEEL ICPP and Hanford and processed in buildings
9212 and 9206. Receipt of this material occurred as early as 1953. (ref: Y-12 Mass
Balance Report)
In 1958 an accidental nuclear fission excursion occurred in Building 9212 due to a 93%
enriched uranium solution being pumped into a nuclear "un-safe" container. (ChemRisk,
196) This incident resulted in a spike in the external radiation data for that year due
primarily to exposures of approximately 300 rad to 5 individuals and less than 100 rad to
3 individuals. (Dixon, 1959, McLendon, 1959, Hurst, 1959, Andrews, 1959)
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Uranium, U-238, EU, HEU, UF4,External
radiation, internal radiation, perchloroethylene, graphite, cadmium, tungsten, magnesium,
alcohol, trimsol, noise, fuming nitric acid, sodium hydroxide, lithium, neutron exposures,
freon and DAG.
6.18 9215 HEU Metal Forming and Machine Shops
Building Description
This facility housed enriched uranium processing and weapons parts fabrication
(including beryllium, lithium, and thorium parts).
The enriched uranium operations included: 1) reduction of UF6 to UF4, 2) reduction of
UF4 to metal, 3) casting or forging, 4) rolling and forming in mill operations, 5)
machining of metals, 6) wet chemistry purification, recycle, and salvage, and 7) UF4
extraction. Enriched uranium from retired weapons was recovered, usually remelted in
an induction furnace, made into a casted part and sent to machining. Sometimes,
V-42
however, the material was cast into long semi-cylindrical or cylindrical shapes and sent to
a rolling/pressing mill and then on to a machining shop to be turned and cut to the desired
design specifications.
Building 9215 had the following primary operational areas: M-Wing, 0-Wing, P-Wing,
M-Wing Blister Area, H2 Machine Shop (Building 9998 —connectedwith 9215),
Metallurgical Lab, and the Third Mill.
The 0-Wing included Salt Baths, Oil Baths and Lead Baths that were used to heat up
uranium materials so that they could be rolled. The Salt Baths contained Potassium
Carbonate, Lithium, and Sodium Hydroxide and were operated at high temperatures. The
Oil Baths used DAG, Perchloroethylene, and Freon as lubricants and the process was
used for hydroforming. The Lead Baths (80% Lead and 20% Bismuth) were used for
slow heat-treating ("aging"). The material came to the 0-Wing out of the casting furnace
(9212 E Wing Furnace) and at the 0-Wing that would form into a billet (using the baths)
and roll into a plate. Risk Mapping participants identified the 0-Wing as the most highly
contaminated are within 9215.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Uranium (enriched and depleted), uranium alloys,
black oxide (U308), plutonium, perchloroethylene, ethylene glycol, beryllium, TCE,
Lead, asbestos, heat, noise, PCBs, lithium, DAG, freon, acetone, alcohol, dykam, carbon
tetrachloride, lead, aluminum, fiberglass, and noise.
Risk Mapping participants mentioned that there were a lot of skin rash problems in M-
Wing and 0-Wing and that prior to 1990 there was "no industrial hygiene or health
physics". They also mentioned that uranium "chip" fires were very common and that you
would just "hold your breath and put them out".
6.19 9401-2 Plating Shop
Building Description
This building was reportedly a plate shop that was formerly the steam plant. The
building became a plating shop in the late SOs or early 60s. Risk mapping participants
also indicated that they did a fair amount of "Work for Others" in this building including
work from University of California, X-10, K-25 Barrier Plant.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Uranium, Black Oxide (U02),Nickel, Cyanide,
copper, gold, chromium, sulfuric acid, HF, Nitric acid, Sulfuric acid, HC1, Allodine, heat
and coal dust, fly ash and phosphates during steam plant operations.
V-43
6.20 9766 Machine Shop
Building Description
Machining operations including beryllium machining.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Beryllium, thorium, radiation and asbestos.
Health and Safety quarterly reports from 1953-1956 indicate that building 9766 was
regularly sampled for airborne beryllium.
6.21 9733 Stable Isotope Production Facility (1945 — 1990)
Building Description
Originally this building housed both alpha and beta calutron operations. After the
decision was made to abandon use of most of the early calutron tracks in 1945, the
remaining staff turned their focus on using a pilot facility with both alpha and beta
calutrons for stable isotope separation and enrichment research. By 1950, 173 isotopes of
43 elements had been collected. Each year the range and purity of isotopes separated was
increased as chemical techniques and equipment improved. (Compere, 1991)
Stable isotope runs were primarily on the XAX and the XBX calutrons. Other units
which were used included TR-1 thru TR-6 and SG-1 thru SG-4 which we believe were
the beta calutrons in building 9204-3.
This building also was used for the Orex pilot process development (9733-1 in 195 1-
1952) and the Elex process (9733-2 in 1950-1951).
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: External radiation, internal radiation, mercury,
uranium, lithium, and various stable isotopes.
6.22 9996 Manufacturing
Building Description
This building had crucible machining operations which by the mid 60s were moved to the
Alpha-i facility.
V-44
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Uranium, U-238
6.23 9998 DU Metal Operations
Building Description
This building was connected to the building 9212. It included the H-2 Machine Shop, the
H-i Foundry and Maintenance shops. The building provided maintenance and machining
support for building 9212. The H-2 Machine shop and M-Wing Shop were renovated in
1988. The facility also did carbon foam and epoxy production operations.
Primary Exposures
Primary exposures reported included: Black Oxide (UO2), DU, Stainless steel, and
Uranium with metal alloys, beryllium, and epoxy.
7.0 DISCUSSION OF PRIMARY EXPOSURES
7.1 Radiation
Monitoring Policies at the Facilities
Historically, the main purpose of the radiation monitoring programs has been to assure
that each worker's exposure to radiation was kept below the current annual prescribed
occupational exposure limit. Because of this aim, data collection in the early years was
very limited for workers who were considered to have low potential for exposure. Also,
at the time of this report, limited information is available concerning the rationale used to
decide which workers to monitor, implementation of these decisions, and the methods
used for assessing reliability, variability, and lower limits of detection. At each facility
the radiation safety personnel were responsible for the monitoring program, making the
programs essentially independent of each other.
Because internal monitoring programs were begun in 1951 by ORNL and in 1950 by Y-
12 the definition of "not monitored" varies by plant and by year. By the early 1950s a
worker who was not monitored for internal exposure was judged to have low potential for
exposure. Because of policies in effect, external monitoring data are available for most
workers from Y-12 only since 1961. ORNL began monitoring for external radiation in
1943. (Watkins, 1993)
External Radiation Exposure
Before November 1951 only those workers entering areas of potential external radiation
exposure were monitored for external dose. In 1947 all workers entering a radiation area
more than three times a week were assigned permanent film badges, but by 1949
V-45
permanent film badges were issued to all workers entering these restricted areas at least
once a week In November of 1951 all workers entering the main X-10area were
required to have a film badge, and by September of 1953 the film badge and security
badge needed for entry were combined into one (Watkins, 1993). Risk mapping
participants reported that they would often do work using a self reading dosimeter (SRD)
and would not wear their film badge They mentioned that the SRD readings were
recorded in HP logs but they were not sure if this information was included in their
personal dose record. (Risk Mapping Interviews, 2003)
According to site records X-10 used only daily SRDs from 1943 until about 1945, in
1945 they began to use weekly film badges until the late SOs when they changed to
quarterly film badges and in about 1975 they began to use either quarterly or annual
TLDs. At the Y-12 facility they also started with SRDs and in about 1950 they began to
use weekly film badges, in about 1959-1960 they used monthly film badges and after
1960 until about 1980 they used quarterly film badges. After 1980 they used either
quarterly or annual TLDs. From 1961-1974 badges for low potential exposure work were
not always read, rather a sample of the badges issued would be read to verify that the
areas were being properly defined. For early film badges the minimum detectable dose
was approximately 25 mrem. The sensitivity of film badges in later years was improved
over that of earlier years. (Watkins, 1993)
After extensive error checking procedures, annual external doses were calculated by
summing all credible gamma and neutron film badge readings taken during the year.
Because of the variability in dosimeter types, reading frequencies, and monitoring
policies over time and facilities, annual doses obtained from the simple summing of
readings during the year may not be comparable at all times, and a recorded dose may not
always accurately represent the true amount of a worker's radiation exposure. A summary
of the recorded annual doses by year and by department is included in Appendix F. This
appendix contains a compilation of dose data from three sources: H&S reports, CEDR
CER data files, and CEDR Mortality study data files. The mortality study data files
included some extrapolation of doses for times when data was missing and therefore the
results are different than the other data sets. A summary of the external dose data (annual
doses greater than 500 mrem) versus department is included in Appendix B.
Internal Radiation Exposure
Film badges measure external exposure over a given period of time; monitoring for
internal exposure is performed at specific points in time; therefore, the results are
estimates of the body or organ burden at the time of measurement. The primary methods
of internal monitoring used were urinalysis and in vivo gamma spectrometry, but fecal
analysis was also performed in some instances. The dosimetry associated with analysis of
urine for radioisotopes of concern depends on relating the amount of an isotope in a
reference volume of urine to the amount contained in the body or in specific organs. The
relationship between these two amounts is affected by many variables, such as the
V-46
radioisotope, time since exposure, the chemical and physical form of the isotope, and
biological variation among individuals.
In general, workers were monitored only if they worked in locations or administrative
groups that were judged by supervisors or radiation safety organizations to have internal
exposure potential. Periodically, after about 1950 individuals from the unmonitored
workers were randomly selected and monitored by ORNL to confirm that unmonitored
workers were indeed unexposed to internal radiation. The policy at Y-12 was to increase
monitonng frequency as internal exposure potential increased (Watkins, 1993, Patterson,
1957, West, 1977)
Workers at TEC had a high potential for internal contamination because of the process
performed at the facility. However, personal monitoring data were not available because
no bioassay or whole body counting programs were established when it was in operation.
Review of External and Internal Data from Databases and HP Reports
There is an increasing trend in external doses at ORNL until the late 1950s and a steady
decrease afterwards, while at Y-12 there is greater variability in the total recorded annual
external dose. The Y-12 peak in 1958 is due to a criticality accident involving eight
workers and does not represent a general increase in external dose. (Appendix F)
The percentage of individuals monitored for external exposures at X-10 remained at
about 85-90% from 1950-1985 while the percentage at Y-12 was at about 20% until 1960
when it was raised to 85-90% Generally the percentage of workers monitored for
internal exposures was between 20- 40% each year with the highest percentages for both
plants occurring around 1963-1965.
A summary of the annual radiation dose ranges for the X-10 site is included in Appendix
F. It is interesting to note that in 1960 there is a sharp drop off in the number of
individuals with annual doses in excess of 2 rem and also a sharp increase in the number
of individuals being monitored.
A 1958 HP report indicated that of the 10 highest cumulative dose due to penetrating
radiation 9 individuals were from the Radioisotope Production Division The cumulative
doses were received over 7 — 15 years and ranged from 42.5 — 64.8 rem. (Hart, 1958)
HP risk mapping participants thought that the worst areas for internal exposures would
have been Buildings 3038, 3517 and 3019.
Recorded external doses at Y-12 were generally lower than doses at X-10. The only
significant internal monitoring was uranium urinalysis and in-vivo testing (uranium-235
and thorium). Over the years it was assumed that monitoring for uranium would be
satisfactory as a surrogate measure of other contaminants in the uranium (i.e.,
transuranics (such as neptunium and plutonium) or fission products in recycled fuel).
Data was unavailable to determine whether there were processes or areas where these
V-47
transuranics may have concentrated and therefore been a greater potential hazard.
Additionally, a recent report discussing the current Y-12 Internal dose program
(Eckerman, 1999) stated that "following the recent restart of operations at the Y-12 Plant,
the Radiological Control Organization (RCO) observed that the enriched uranium
exposures appeared to involve insoluble rather than soluble uranium that presumably
characterized most earlier Y-12 operations." Based on this finding the bioassay program
was modified, particularly specifying the need for routine fecal sampling. This raises
questions with regard to potential missed doses.
7.2 Beryllium
Data from the Y-12 Beryllium Worker Enhanced Medical Surveillance Program, funded
by DOE, indicated that the buildings associated with CBD cases or sensitized workers
included: Alpha-5, 9202, Butler Building, Beta-4, Beta-2, 9212, 9766, 9995 and 9998.
(Bingham, 1997)
Additionally, a 1973 Y-12 document (DOE, 1973) identified Alpha-5, Alpha-3, 9202,
and 9995 as "Beryllium Control Areas". Additionally, H&S summary reports from 1953-
1960 indicate that Beryllium air sampling was frequently conducted in Building 9766 and
to a less extent in Building 9212 (Appendix D).
A broad based approach to defining the group potentially exposed to beryllium is
recommended since published data (Newman 1989, Kreiss 1996) demonstrate that while
there are job related and exposure related elevated risks for chronic beryllium disease
(CBD), individuals with low-level exposure can be affected For this reason a two-tiered
approach is recommended based on exposure groupings.
7.3 Mercury
The mercury concentration in the workplace air was monitored frequently at the Y-12
facility (In 1956, over 200,000 air readings were taken — see Appendix D). In the 1955
cascade start-up, many readings of mercury concentrations in the workplace air were
higher than the 0.1 mg/m"3 then recommended (current recommendation is 0.05
mg/mt3). A urinalysis program started in 1953 was expanded to provide a check on the
worker mercury exposures. During 1955 and into 1956 approximately 200 —300 workers
had readings that exceeded the 0.3 mg/liter of urine recommended limit. When a
workers' urinary mercury remained elevated for several specimens the workers were re-
assigned. Approximately 70 workers were involved in temporary re-assignments of this
nature. In addition to the air sampling and urine program, there was a special medical
surveillance program involving clinical examinations of mercury workers being
performed every six months, Persons with a history of albumin uria, kidney problems, or
hypertension were screened out and not allowed to work with mercury. (Mercury Task
Force, 1983(a), 1983(b))
During the latter part of the Colex start-up during 1955, AEC and Y-12 management
undertook a crash program to bring the workplace mercury vapor levels down to
acceptable levels. Air sampling results seem to suggest that airborne concentrations were
V-48
reduced after 1955 as is indicated by the drop in the percentage of air samples in excess
of the 0.1 mglm"3 limit (see Appendix D).
A Y-12 1977 report, Mercury Inventory at Y-12 Plant, 1950 through 1977, indicated that
2.4 million pounds of mercury has been 'lost' or 'unaccounted for'. (Mercury Task
Force, 1983(a), 1983(b))
A Emory University study conducted in 199x as a follow-up to University of Michigan
study of the mercury workers at Y-12 showed that 'neurological effects of relatively
heavy exposure were still detectable more than 30 years after cessation of that exposure'.
The study concluded that the exposure measure with the strongest association with the
outcome was cumulative exposure (cases were selected by cumulative exposure of >=
2000 ugHg/liter-quareter or a one time urine value of greater than 600 ugHg/liter). The
department numbers identified as "High Exposure Potential" in the NIOSH report
included: 2025, 2026, 2681, 2682, 2683, 2685, and 2690. (Emory University)
Priority buildings (buildings where frequent sampling for mercury was conducted and/or
a high percentage of samples were identified in excess of the site MPC levels), based on
company lB records (Appendix D), include: Beta-4, Alpha-2, 9202, Alpha-5 and Alpha-
4. According to a 1957 Health Physics Program Report (Y-1186) (Patterson, 1957) "a
routine mercury vapor sampling program is maintained in buildings 9201-2, 9201-4,
9201-5, 81-10, and 9204-2; buildings in which a potentially serious mercury vapor
problem may exist". During 1955 through 1956 the percent of mercury urine samples
which exceeded the MPC (0 3mg/m"3) ranged from 10% to 30% A further breakdown
of this data indicates that Machinists were exposed to the highest levels while chemical
operators were lower and electrician still lower than that. TheMachinists reported
concentrations ranged from 0.5 to0.3 mgHg/liter, the chemical operators ranged from
0.46 to 0.3, and fially the reported concentrations related to Electricians exposures ranged
from 0.12 to 0.2 ugHg/liter. (Mercury Task Force, 1983(a), 1983(b)
At X-10, Building 4501 housed the Orex pilot project and during risk mapping sessions
was reported to have had a lot of mercury. Other uses of mercury at the X-10 site appear
to be on a smaller scale (instruments, labs, etc.). It should however, be pointed out that
many X-10 workersbegan working at the Y-12 site (as X-10 employees) after the
calutron operations were shut down.
7.4 Caustics
Nitric acid and Hydrofluoric acid were used extensively in isotope separation and
purification operations. Specifically buildings 3019, 9212, 9215, 3505, Alpha-5, 9203,
9206, 9929, and 9401-2 were involved in uranium or other isotope recovery, processing,
separation or purification. Steps within these processes involved many caustic materials
including two of the primary acids used, Hydrofluoric acid and Nitric acid (in some cases
fuming nitric acid).
V-49
H&S summary reports indicate that air sampling for lithium was conducted at the Y-12
site Risk mapping participants mentioned that lithium at the site caused strong lung
imtation and sometimes frequent sneezing Also, frequently had skin burns from
working with this material.
Additionally, Tetramethyl ammonium borohydrate (TMAB) was present at the Y-12 site
and is, according to toxicology references (Holland) a strong irritant and is considered to
have similar toxic properties as other boron compounds.
7.5 Solvents
Chlorinated solvents were used extensively at both the Y-12 and X-1O facilities over the
history of the sites. Generally the use of carbon tetrachloride was only prevalent during
the early years of operation. TCE and perchloroethylene were used extensively
throughout the history of the sites. The areas where potential exposures were the
greatest included the pilot separation or processing buildings and the machine shops.
Participants in the nsk mapping sessions indicated that the machinists would "use perc to
put out chip fires while machining uranium". They indicated they would 'use it for
everything'.
In addition to the common chlorinated solvents mentioned above and used for cleaning
and degreasing, acetonitrile was used at the Y-12 site.
7.6 Noise
Noise exposure was reported as a problem associated with production operations at both
the X-1O and Y-12 sites. The type of operations conducted at the sites over the history
(e.g. separations operations, calutrons, lithium separation operations, machining) would
be consistent with elevated noise exposures. Risk mapping participants also indicated
that hearing protection requirements, or the adherence to the requirements, was fairly lax
in the early years.
7.7 Asbestos
As in many of the DOE facilities, asbestos use was prevalent at both X-1O and Y-12.
Asbestos was common in all building materials and additionally other uses including
asbestos blankets, asbestos covering on piping, and asbestos gloves were reported;
Highest exposures to asbestos would likely have been maintenance workers due to the
more intrusive nature of their jobs.
V-50
8.0 References
Andrews, GA, Sitterson, BW, Kretchmar, AL, and Bruger, M, 1959. Accidental
radiation Excursions at the Oak Ridge Y-12 Plant, IV Preliminary Report on Clinical and
Laboratory Effects in the frradiated Employees, HP, 1959, Volume 2, 134-138.
Bingham, E, 1997. Surveillance of Former Construction Workers at Oak Ridge
Reservation: A Revised Needs Assessment, University of Cincinnati, December, 1997.
Breslin, A.J. and Harris, W.B. Health Protection in Beryllium Facilities Summary of Ten
Years of Experience. OROO 14820. US Atomic Energy Commission. May 1, 1958
Burch, W.D. Organization of the Interventions on 'Hot' Facilities mishaps, maintenance,
and dismantling . AEA-SM-125/44.
Brooksbank,Sr. R.E., Patton, B.D., and Krichinsky, A. M. Historical Programmatic
Overview of Building 3019. ORNL/TM-12720. August 1994.
Bruce, F. 1956. Behavior of Fission Products in Solvent Extraction Processes, Progress
in Nuclear Energy, Series III, Process Chemistry, McGraw Hill, 1956.
Bruce, F, and Ferguson, D. 1960. Two directly maintained pilot plants", Geneva
Conference, 1960.
Caplan, Knowlton J., Edwards Richard M., Fellows John A., Harrington Charles D.,
Kuhiman Carl W., Philoon Wallace C., Ruehle Archie E., and Shepardson John U.
Uranium Production Technology. 1959.
Case, J.M. and Watkins, E.R. How Oak Ridge Machines Beryllium. American Machinist.
Y-FC-50. December 22, 1955.
Checkoway, H, Mathew, RM, Watson, JE, Tankersley, WG, Wolf, SH, Sith, JC, and Fry,
SA. 1985. Radiation work experience and cause specific mortality among workers at an
energy research laboratory. British Journal of Industrial Medicine, 42: 525-533, 1985.
Checkoway, H, Pearce, N, Crawford-Brown, DJ, and Cragle, DL. 1988. Radiation doses
and cause-specific mortality among workers at a nuclear materials fabrication plant.
American Journal of Epidemiology, 127 (2): 255-266, 1988.
ChemRisk. 1993. Bruce, GM, Buddenbaum, JE, Lamb, JK, and Widner, TE. Oak Ridge
Health Study, Phase I and II Reports, 1993.
ChemRisk. 1993(a), Y-12 Enriched Uranium Process flow diagrams, report excerpts,
Accession No. 466.
v-Si
Compere, A.L. and Griffith, W.L. The U.S. Calutron Program for Uranium Enrichment:
History, Technology, Operations, and Production ORNL-5928 October 1991
Cragle, DL, McLain, R, Qualters, J, Hickey, JLS, Wilkinson, G, Tankersley, WG,
Lushbaugh, CC. 1988. Mortality among workers at a nuclear fuels production facility.
American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 14: 379-40 1, 1988.
Cragle, DL, 1996. CEDR ORISE Working Data File Set, CER ORISE, 1996.
Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z. Health Physics Division Applied Health Physics Annual
Report for 1964. ORNL-3 820.
Davis, D.M., and Auxier, J.A. Applied Health Physics And Safety Annual Report for
1976, ORNL-5310.
Davis, D.M., and Auxier, J.A. Industrial Safety Applied Health Physics Annual Report
for 1977. ORNL-5420.
Davis, D.M., and Auxier, J.A. Industrial Safety Applied Health Physics Annual Report
for 1978. ORNL-5543.
Davis, D.M., and Auxier, J.A. Industrial Safety Applied Health Physics Annual Report
for 1979. ORNL-5663.
Davis, D.M., and Auxier, J.A. Industrial Safety Applied Health Physics Annual Report
for 1980. ORNL-5821.
Dean, O.C., Messing, A.F., and Forsberg, H.C. The Use of mercury in Reprocessing
Nuclear Fuels. February, 1960.
Dixon, C and Thomas, J. 1959. Accidental Radiation Excursion at the Oak Ridge Y-12
Plant — I Description and Physics of the Accident, HP, 1959, 363-372.
DOE, 1973. Beryllium Control Areas (Y-12 facility), Be-USA02571, OR0007705.
DOE, 2001, DOE Recycled Fuel Mass Balance Report for the Y-12 Complex, 2001.
Dupree, EA, Watkins, JP, JN Ingle, Wallace, PW, West, CM, and Tankersley, WG.
1995. Uranium Dust Exposure and Lung Cancer Risk in Four Uranium Processing
Operations. Journal of Epidemiology.
Eckerman, K.F. and Kerr, G.D. Y-12 Uranium Exposure Study. ORNL/TM-1999-1 14.
August 5, 1999.
Emory University and Center for Epidemiological Research division of Oak Ridge
Associated Universities, Final Report for A Study of the Health Effects of Exposure to
V-52
Elemental Mercury: A Follow-up of Mercury Exposed Workers at the Y-12 Plant in Oak
Ridge. HE#94-181, l9xx.
Frome, EL, Cragle, DL, Watkins, JP, Wing, SB, Shy, CM, Tankersley, WG and West,
CM. 1997. Oak Ridge Mortality Study, ORNL-6785, 1997.
Frome, EL, Cragle, DL, and McLain, RW, 1990. Poisson regression of the mortality
among a cohort of World War II nuclear industry workers (TEC workers). Radiation
Research 123: 138-152, 1990.
Genung, Richard, Jolley, Robert, and Mrochek, John. A Brief History of the Chemical
Technology Division. ORNL/M-2733. May 1993.
Goldsmith, W.A., Ellis, W.B., Rhyne, W.R., and Ragan, C.C. Isotopes White Paper:
Assessment of Selected Isotopes Circle Facilities, Evaluation of Isotope Processing
Alternatives, and Funding Justification for LLW-CAT System for Isotopes Area. Lee
Wan & Associates, Inc. December 1987.
Goldsmith, W.A., Ellis, W.B., Rhyne, W.R., and Ragan, C.C. Isotopes White Paper:
Volume II: Appendices Lee Wan & Associates, Inc. January 1988.
Harris, William B The Industrial Hygiene of Uranium Fabncation U S Atomic Energy
Commission. June 6, 1958.
Hart, J.C. Health Physics Division Applied Health Physics Annual Report for 1958.
ORNL-2777.
Hart, J.C. Health Physics Division Applied Health Physics Annual Report for 1959.
ORNL-3073.
Hart, J.C., and Morgan, K.Z. Health Physics Division Applied Health Physics Annual
Report for 1960. ORNL-3 159.
Hart, J.C., and Morgan, K.Z. Health Physics Division Applied Health Physics Annual
Report for 1961. ORNL-3284.
Hart, J.C., Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z. Health Physics Division Applied Health
Physics Annual Report for 1962. ORNL-3490
Hart, J.C., Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z.. Health Physics Division Applied Health
Physics Annual Report for 1963. ORNL-3665,
Holland, J.M. and Epler, J.L. Toxicity and Mutagenic Evaluation:
Tetramethylammonium B orohydride (TMAB) ORNL—5 576.
V-53
Hurst, GS, Ritchie, RH, and Emerson, LC, 1959. Accidental radiation Excursions at the
Oak Ridge Y-12 Plant, ifi Determination of Radiation Doses, HP, 1959, Volume 2, 121-
133.
Kreiss, K, Mroz, MM, Newman, LS, Martyny, J and Zhen, B, 1996. Machining risk of
beryllium disease and sensitizatin with median exposures below 2 mglm"3. American
Journal of Industrial Medicine. 30: 16-25, 1996.
Lincoln, Thomas, MD. Health Division Annual Report Covering Period: July 1955- June
1956. ORNL-2190. February 13, 1957.
Lippman, M., Ong, L.D.Y., and Harris, W.B.. The Significance of Urine Uranium
Excretion Data. Health and Safety Laboratory. HASL-120. June 15, 1962.
Labor Occupational Safety and Health Program (LOSH) of the UCLA Center for
Occupational and Environmental Health, Risk Mapping: A Group Method for Improving
Workplace Health and Safety, UCLA, 1996.
McLendon, JD, 1959. Accidental radiation Excursions at the Oak Ridge Y-12 Plant, II
Health Physics Aspects of the Accident, HP, 1959, volume 2, 2 1-29.
McMillan, Edwin M. The Transuranium Elements: Early History. Nobel Lecture,
December 12, 1951.
McRee, P.C., West, C.M., and Mclendon, J.D. Y-12 Radiation Safety Manuel. Y-1401.
March 24, 1965.
Mercury Task Force, 1983(a). A Study of Mercury at the Y-12 Plant, Accountability, and
Impacts on Y-12 Workers and the Environment-1950 to 1983. Y/X-24.
Mercury Task Force, 1983(b), Mercury at the Y-12 Plant. Y/EX-23. November 1983.
Morgan, KZ. 1959. Preliminary Report of Action Taken by the Health Physics Division
following the Explosion at ORNL on November, 20, 1959, December, 1959.
Morgan, KZ. 1961. Health Physics Problems Associatedwith Recent Accidents at
ORNL. August 11, 1961.
Newman, LS, Kreiss, K, Mroz, MM, and Campbell, PA, 1989. Screening blood test
identifies subclinical beryllium disease. Journal of Occupational Medicine. 31: 603-608,
1989.
ORNL, 1982. Industrial Safety Applied Health Physics Annual Report for 1982. ORNL-
5962.
V-54
ORNL, 1989. ORNL Releases During 1948 and 1949. ORNL/FPO-89/121. December
15, 1989.
ORNL, 1997. ORNL Isotopes Facilities Deactivation Project. Final Deactivation Porjest
Report on the Alpha Powder Facility, Building 3028, at ORNIL, Oak Ridge, Tn.
ORNLJER-399. April 1997.
ORNL, 1995, Level 3 Baseline Risk Assessments for Building 3515 at ORNL,
ORNIJER-311. September 13, 1995
ORNL, 1997(a), ORNL Safety Analysis Report for the Radioactive Materials Analytical
Laboratory (RMAL) (Building 2026), ORNLICASDI2O26ISAR/R0, 1997.
Owings, Edward. Historical Review of Accountable Nuclear Materials at the Y-12 Plant.
Y/EXT-00 153/DEL Rev. July 28, 1995.
Parker-Brown, Marianne, 1995. Worker Risk Mapping: An Education for Action
Approach, New Solutions, 1995.
Parrott, J.R. Decontamination of Cells 6 and 7, Building 3019, Following Plutonium —
Release Incident. ORNL-3100. August 25, 1961
Patterson, G.R., West, C.M., and McLendon, J.D. The Y-12 Health Physics Program. Y-
1186. November 1, 1957
Quist, Arvin S. OSCA (Oak Ridge Classificaton Associates). A History of Classified
Activities At Oak Ridge National Laboratory. ORCA-7. September 29, 2000.
Richardson, David, 1998. Expanded ORNL Cohort Study (CEDR, orxlOaO5).
Rimshaw, S.J., and Ketchen, E.E. Curium Data Sheets. ORNL-4357. January 1969.
Rimshaw, S.J., and Ketchen, E.E. Compatibility Data Sheets for Cesium-144, Cesium-
137, Curium, and Strontium-90. ORNL-4189. November 1967.
Risk Mapping, Risk Mapping Interviews with former Y-12 and X-10 workers, CPS, Inc.
June — August, 2003.
Rupp, A.F. A Description of the Isotopes Development Center. September 30, 1963.
Schaich, R.W. Isotopes Development Center. Hazards Report For Building 3028-E.
ORNL-TM-768. March 1964
Schaich, R.W. Safety Analysis of Building 3028. ORNL-TM-3 192. December 1970.
V-55
Schaich, R.W. Isotopes Development Center. Hazards Report for Building 3028-B.
ORNL-TM-768. March 1964.
Schaich, R.W., Hunter, H.G., and Setaro, J.A. Safety Analysis of Isotopes Alpha
Handling Facility. ORNL-TM-2845. March 1970.
Schaich, R.W., Butler, T.A., Beauchamp, E.E., and Lamb, B. Hazard Report for Building
3517. ORNL-TM-852. May 4, 1964.
Sease, J.D., Lotts, A.L., and Davis, F.C. Thorium-Uranium-233 Oxide (kilorod) Facility-
Rod Fabrication Process and Equipment. ORNL-3539. April 1964.
Sims, T.M. Personnel-Exposure and Containment Control in the Routine Operation of the
ORNL Research Reactors. ORNL-TM-278.
Snyder, W.S., Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z. Health Physics And Safety Annual Report
for 1965. ORNL-3969.
Snyder, W.S., Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z. Health Physics And Safety Annual Report
for 1966. ORNL-4146.
Snyder, W.S., Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z. Health Physics And Safety Annual Report
for 1967. ORNL-4286.
Snyder, W S , Davis, D M, and Morgan, K Z Applied Health Physics And Safety
Annual Report for 1968. ORNL-4423.
Snyder, W.S., Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z. Applied Health Physics And Safety
Annual Report for 1969. ORNL-4563.
Snyder, W.S., Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z. Applied Health Physics And Safety
Annual Report for 1970. ORNL-4690.
Snyder, W.S., Davis, D.M., and Morgan, K.Z. Applied Health Physics And Safety
Annual Report for 1971. ORNL-4795.
Snyder, W.S., Davis, D.M., and Auxier, LA. Applied Health Physics And Safety Annual
Report for 1972. ORNL-4894.
Soman, S.D. Personnel Protection in Hot Facilities. IAEA-SM-125/3
Stapleton, D.R. A Brief History of the Research Reactors Division of ORNL, ORNUM-
2342, 1993.
Thompson, W.E. History of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory 1943-1963. August 23,
1963
V-56
Thompson, W.E. A History of the Radioactive Barium-LanthanumProcess and
Production. ORNL-246 Special. June 22, 1949.
Turner, J.E., Davis, D.M., and Auxier, J.A. Applied Health Physics And Safety Annual
Report for 1973. ORNL-4974.
Turner, J.E., Davis, D.M., and Auxier, J.A. Applied Health Physics And Safety Annual
Report for 1974. ORNL-5055.
Turner, J.E., Davis, D.M., and Auxier, J.A. Applied Health Physics And Safety Annual
Report for 1975. ORNL-5 169.
Turner, R.R. Review of Available Information for Mercury at Building 920 1-2.Y/TS-
626. February 1990.
USAEC (US Atomic Energy Commission). Symposium on Occupational Health
Experience and Practices in the Uranium Industry. HASL-58. October 15-17, 1958
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission. Historical Regulations. Chapter 0524 Permissible
Levels of Radiation Exposure. AEC 0524-01. January 9, 1958.
Vance, J E and Warner, J C Uranium Technology General Survey 1951
Watkins, JP, Reagan, JL, Cragle, DL, Frome, EL, West, CM, Crawford-Brown, D,and
Tankersley, WG, 1993. Collection, Validation, and Description of Data for Oak Ridge
Nuclear Facility Mortality Study, Technical Report J42, ORISE, 1993.
Watkins, JP, Cragle, DL, Frome, EL, West, CM, Crawford-Brown, D, and Tankersley,
WG, Adjusting External Doses from ORNL and Y-12 facilities for the Oak Ridge
Nuclear Facility Mortality Study, Technical Report G-34, ORISE, 1994.
West, C.M., Scott, L.M., and Schultz, N.B. Sixteen Years of Uranium Personnel
Monitoring Experience in Retrospect. Y/DD-225. July 3-8, 1977.
Wing, S, Shy, CM, Wood, J, Wolf, S, Cragle, DL, and Frome, EL. 1991. Mortality
among workers at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. JAMA265 (11): 1397-1402, 1991.
Wing, S, Shy, CM, Wood, J, Wolf, 5, Cragle, DL, Tankersley, WG, and Frome, EL.
1993. Job factors, radiation and cancer mortality at Oak Ridge National Laboratory:
follow-up through 1984. American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 23: 265-279, 1993.
Wolf, B.S. M.D. Progress Report of Field Investigations Pertinent to the Problem of
Maximum Acceptable Levels for Uranium Exposure. U.S. Atomic Energy Commission.
September 26, 1949.
V-57
Wolf, Susanne, 1996. Oak Ridge Y-12 Mortality Study, (CEDR-oryl2aO5).
Wolf, Susanne, 1998, CIEDR Chemical and Physical Hazard Assessment WorkingData
Files Set, 1998.
Wolf, Sussane, 1998(a) CEDR Detailed External Radiation Mortality workingdata file
set, 1998.
Wolf, Sussane, 1998(b). CEDR Detailed Internal Raddiation Mortality workingdata file
set, 1998.
Y-12, 1952-1962. Y-12 Quarterly Reports Health and Safety Section.
V-58
Section VI. Focus Groups
(Th
Introduction
Description of Focus Groups
In conducting the Needs Assessment of the X-1O and Y-12workers at Oak Ridge, it was
necessary to find out directly fromthe workers what they would like in an occupational medical
screening program. While his was partially accomplished throughquestionnaires, talking to
workers in person in an organized setting was essential to developing the program most
responsive to their needs. Thus, four focus group sessions with former and current workers were
conducted to gauge their occupational health concerns, how they perceivetheir occupational
health risks, their desire for and expectations of medical surveillanceand high risk notification,
their current access to health care, and potential issues concerning outreach.
Two focus groups were held on July 8, one for X-10 and one for Y-12. On August 5, two
additional sessions took place with different participants from the twofacilities.
Because of classification issues, the four sessions were held in asecured room in the
Security Building at the site and were restricted to those workers with L or Q clearances (for Y-
12). Temporary clearances were granted for retiredworkers. The Focus Group Moderator for all
four sessions was Tom Moser, local coordinator for the WHPP programat K-25, a current worker
at K-25 and a long-time health and safety trainingcoordinator for the local. Mr. Moser has a Q
clearance. The health and safety representatives for the respective plants assisted him in the
sessions: Jeff Hill, David Barncord and Jim Blankenship for X-l0, and Larry Jones, Harold
Lawson and Carl Johnson for Y- 12. Carl "Bubba" Scarbrough,ATLC president, worked with the
health and safety representatives to plan and set up the sessions. He also welcomed each group
and provided a brief overview of how ATLC was able to get the programinitiated.
The session was taped with a tape recorder supplied by DOE. The tapes and the
demographic data sheets were submitted to the DOE securityoffice for clearance prior to release.
Once cleared, a professional transcribed the tapes; this report is based on that transcription and
reports from the health and safety representatives and Tom Moser. Due to a technical problem
involving the tape, some of the comments from the participants wereinaudible.
The Moderator Guide used for the sessions was modeled on the one originallyused at the
K-25 focus groups, which was modified by the X-10 and Y-12 healthand safety representatives
after group discussions on May 20, 2003 (See Appendix _). At that time, Sylvia Kieding gave
an instructional presentation on focus groups and made recommendations to Tom Moser on how
the X-10 and Y-12 sessions should be conducted.
The presence of knowledgeable and trusted health and safety representatives from X-10
and Y-12, as well as the experience of the moderator, Tom Moser, provided anindispensable
contribution to the discussions.
Focus Group Format
All participants were assured that their names would remain confidentialand were asked
permission to audiotape the session. As decided previously bythe ATLC health and safety
representatives, the agreement had to be unanimous. The participants wereasked to fill out
demographic information sheets, which are summarized in thetables preceding each set of focus
groups.
The participants consisted of former and current workers, both salaried and hourly. The
ATLC health and safety representatives attempted to make the groups representative of the sites,
selecting participants on the basis of their experience and job category atthe plant.
vI-1
Table 1. Demographic Characteristics of X-iO Focus GroupParticipants,
by Date of Focus Group
Gender
Male
Female
Average age, years
Duration of employment at X-1O, years
Employee type
Hourly
Salaried
Reason for leaving X-1O
Retirement
Early retirement
Voluntary separation package
Other (i.e., off-the-job injury/illness)
Race
White
Black
Marital status
Married
Single
Education
Some high school or less
1
0
2
High school graduate
1
4
5
Some college or advanced
3
2
5
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
vocational training
College degree
Some post-college
Graduate degree
0
2
3
3
3
4
0
0
1
2
3
2
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
3
0
Income
$i0,001-20,000
$20,001-30,000
$30,001-40,000
$40,001 -50,000
$50, 001-70,000
$70, 000+
No answer
Religion
Protestant
Other
No answer
VI-2
Report of X-1O Focus Group Findings, by Tpjc
The following is a breakdown of responses to the questions posed bythe Moderator
following the Moderator's Guide for the X-10 sessionsthe mornings of July 8 and August 5 The
results from the two X-l0 focus groups have beencondensed into the most salient findings from
both sessions.
Topic I: Health Concerns — Perception of Occupational Health Risks
Questions:
Participants were asked if they think that they or their co-workers are at risk from
occupationally related health problems and, if so,what they are.
Summary of responses:
• The primary hazards named by the participantsincluded radiation, mercury, asbestos,
beryllium and chemical exposures in general.
• The workers said that management told them that radiation didn't bother you. Workers
were sent into radiation areas repeatedly regardless of whether or not they were hot.
• Participants said that they would go on a joband not know what they were working with
and that their exposures dated back to a time when monitoring wasinadequate or non-
existent. There was really no program to address the various hazards.
• Most of them stated that cancer and lung disease aretheir major concerns from job
exposures A few mentioned heartdisease The cancers of concern were prostrate and
leukemia and one area reproduction was cited as an areawhere "everyone got cancer"
• The workers felt that the cancer rate was higher atX- 10 than in the general population
Because of lack of ventilation, they felt that secretaries could have high or higher
exposures than other workers to such substances as mercury. Every day they walked past
a building with a mercury pit without any protection.
Sample responses:
"In a steam pit below a particular building, there was a mercury pit. They literally shoveled the
mercury out of the pit."
We worked at a time when asbestos was not viewed as a problem you d have to shower in the
afternoon to get the asbestos out of your hair."
"I was a laborer finally assigned to the burial ground collectingand transporting and disposing
of radioactive waste."
"in a 1995 regular (every two year) screening, 1 had a PSA reading of51.85 but was not told
about it until June of 1999. 1 had prostrate surgery eventually followed up by 35 radiation
treatments. Hand I been told in 1995 that I had the51.85 reading, in all probability the cancer
would not have spread outside the prostrate
VI-3
"I have had vein problems, heart problems and I got lung problems. I was never informed by the
company but I have had asbestosis."
"My mother worked in rep roduction for years and she died with leukemia. Everybodyin the
reproduction area had some form of cancer."
Topic II: Health Care/Delivery Utilization Issues
Questions:
1. Participants were asked about their current medical needs and current medical programs.
2. Participants were also asked if they would be interested in and participate in a medical and
health information program for their occupational health concerns.
3. The workers were asked what they would like in an occupational health program and
where/how they would like the program administered.
4. Are there any roadblocks or impediments to participation, and how can they be resolved?
Summary of responses:
• Participants generally had periodic physicals from their primary care physicians but
admitted that the primary care physician never discussed their work nor was he/she
qualified to look at occupational disease.
• The workers were unanimously in favor of an occupational medical screening program,
under certain conditions. They were emphatic that none of the testing take place at
clinics in Oak Ridge because they felt there were no physicians that could be trusted in
Oak Ridge.
•
They would like a complete physical with special attention paid to the exposures at the
site. They felt that plant medical records should be incorporated into the testing program.
Two of the most important components of the program should be trust and credibility,
which should be reflected in the clinics chosen Clinics should be within driving distance
and the program should be continuous as opposed to consisting of a single exam. It
should also include current workers. They are hoping to get the CT scan unit because of
their exposures to beryllium, asbestos and possible other lung carcinogens. They feel that
the CT scan unit can save lives, as it has done at K-25.
• The three biggest impediments to a successful program would be lack of trust,
inconvenience, and the absence of physicians independent of the DOE. Also cited was
the difficulty of getting plant medical records for use in the program.
Sample responses:
"I would like to see a program that would just monitor our health, just a good overall physical
looking for things that might be particular to exposures that we might have had in the workplace,
either chemicals, radiation paints, or whatever."
"I think the perception is that Oak Ridge physicians may be biased... they're not going to step on
anybody's toes."
VI-4
Topic III: Outreach/Access and Health Education/Information Resources
Questions:
1. Participants were asked the best ways to notify people of a medical testing program and to
invite them to participate.
2. What are their current sources of health information?
3. How do participants like to get health information?
Summary of responses:
• There was general agreement among the workers that direct mailings to their houses are
the best form of notification and invitation. Other methods included the TV news, retiree
newsletters, and a notice in the checks paid out to retirees. Participants also cited word-
of-mouth.
• Current sources of health information include the AARP magazine, a retirement paper,
brochures in doctor's offices and the Internet. They like to get health information
through direct mailings.
Sample responses:
"You get a retirement newsletter, they've got addresses.
"Most everyone watches the news. If you had it on, like channel 10."
"We're retirees, benefit plans will have, will know where we're at because they mail our checks
out."
"I'm involved in the sale of health insurance and life insurance and those kinds of thins and I'm
bombarded with all that information. I tend to try to read it as much as I can and I am one that,
fI see a brochure laying around somewhere, I tend to pick it up."
Observations, X-10 Focus Groups
The use of focus groups in this needs assessment has yielded information that will be
invaluable in structuring a medical testing program and providing health hazard education at X-
10.
The impressions captured here are based on a review of the transcript of the sessions as
well as demographic sheets, both of which were reviewed by DOE for clearance. The focus
group moderator, Tom Moser, and the X-10 health and safety representatives were,of course,
responsible for the quality of the data gathered and for keeping the discussions focused.
There was a lack of trust in DOE and local clinics, which they believed were too closely
tied to DOE. The lack of past exposure data prompted the recommendation that any medical
testing program consist of a comprehensive physical supplemented by testing targeted to the
specific exposures at X-10.
VI-5
There was repeated insistence that medical data from the plant medical clinics be
included and reviewed as part of the medical testing program.
All of the participants felt that the program should be ongoing rather than consist of a
one-time exam. They felt that the latency period for many diseases demanded periodic
monitoring.
Recommendations, X-1O
•
The need exists for an occupational medical surveillance program.
Focus group participants felt that an occupational medical program was
necessary because of the lack of knowledge of their primary care physiciansof
the impact of occupational exposures.
• Independent physicians without any ties should administer the medical testing
program to DOE or the contractors and in cooperation with ATLC.
Participants cited trust and credibility as the most important components of any
medical testing program or there would be lack of interest and participation.
They ruled out Oak Ridge as a testing site because of its close ties with DOE and
the contractors, for instance. Local clinics should be used but they should be
within driving distance.
• The testing program should incorporate plant medical records.
Participants stressed their desire to include plant medical records if this were
at all feasible.
• Participants favored direct mailings to inform workers of the program and
invite them to participate.
The workers felt that the best way to reach X- 10 workers is through direct mail,
perhaps through a notice included in pension and pay checks.
• The testing program should be on going rather than a one-time occurrence.
Participants repeatedly stressed the need for periodic testing because of the long
latency periods common to many of the diseases of concern.
• Current as well as former workers should participate in the testing program.
The focus group members felt that the program should begin with the retirees but
should go on to include current workers because of the mistrust of the site clinic.
VI-6
Table 1. Demographic Characteristics of Y-12 Focus Group Participants,
by Date of Focus Group
July 8
August 5
Total
11
0
7
0
-
18
0
Gender
Male
Female
Average age, years
59.8
67.2
63.5
Duration of employment at X-1O, years
31.0
31.5
31.2
1
7
0
17
1
Employee type
Hourly
Salaried
10
4
3
0
2
3
0
0
2
1
3
0
0
Reason for leaving X-1O
Retirement
Early retirement
Voluntary separation package
Other (i.e., off-the-job injury/illness)
Race
White
Black
10
1
7
0
17
1
9
1
16
1
1
1
7
0
0
Marital status
Married
Single
Divorced
2
5
5
0
4
2
0
8
3
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
Education
Some high school or less
High school graduate
Some college or advanced
vocational training
College degree
Some post-college
Graduate degree
No answer
Income
$10,001-20,000
$20,001-30,000
$30,001 -40,000
1
1
1
2
5
1
4
1
3
7
2
0
0
3
0
1
2
1
0
1
0
$40, 001-50,000
$50,001-70,000
$70,000+
No answer
17
1
0
11
0
0
6
1
0
Religion
Protestant
Other
No answer
vI-7
Report of Y-12 Focus Group Findings, By Topic
The following is a breakdown of responses posed by the Moderator using the
Moderator's Guide for the Y-12 sessions that took place on July 8 and August 5. Questions 3-5
of Topic I are included in Topic II for continuity. The findings from the two groups are
combined here to give an overall picture.
Topic I: Health Concerns — Perception of Occupational Health Risks
Questions:
Participants were asked if they think that they or their co-workers are at risk from
occupationally related health problems and, if so, what they are.
Summary of responses:
• Workers cited concerns about exposures to uranium smoke (from uranium fires),
asbestos, mercury, solvents, acids, and beryllium, as well as heavy metals.
• Health concerns included mesothelioma and cancers of the lung, prostrate, stomach, and
brain as well as hearing loss, chronic beryllium disease, heart problems and neurological
problems from mercury exposure.
• The participants attributed many of the health problems today to unsafe work practices in
the past as well as threats of job loss if workers complained about working conditions.
For instance, in the past, workers would eat, drink and smoke around the equipment;
painters would work in an area with no ventilation; and personal protective equipment
such as respirators were not available The contractor failed to warn workers of the job
hazards, telling them that "they could eat all of it [they] want, not worry about it."
Sample responses:
"I had a brother-in-law work out there and he had cancer of the brain and passed away and it
was related back to the plant."
"I left Y- 12 when I was 59, 1 had heart problems, I had hearing problems, where we went through
so many noisy compressors, areas that we had to go in."
"Some of my fellow workers got berylliosis. We lost one last year, he had lung cancer and we've
lost a lot of our group, the painters."
"Well, I've got one out there (machinist) that's got cancer of the bladder. I know another one
who's got cancer of the bladder."
Topic II: Health Care/Delivery Utilization Issues
Questions:
1. Participants were asked about their current medical needs and current medical programs.
VI-8
2. Are the workers interested in a program for their occupational healthconcerns? How would it
be structured? Would you and your fellow workers participate and do you receive yearly (or
periodic) physicals?
3. Where do the workers go for current medical services? Are there specific clinics or hospitals
that people feel most comfortable with?
4. Are there any impediments to participation in an occupational medical programand how can
these be resolved?
Summary of responses:
• The current workers now get a physical from the site clinic every five yearsinstead of
every two years, as in the past.
• The retired workers generally get physicals every year from their primary care physician.
One current worker expressed a concern about taking the BeLPT because if sensitivity is
confirmed, it could have job repercussions.
• Workers are skeptical of local primary care physicians' ability to beattentive to their
needs.
• Those with health problems not only have a primary care physician but a specialist as
well.
• In general, the workers want a well-structured physical examination by physicians
independent of the DOE and its contractors. They want to be screened for hearing loss,
cancers and stomach problems.
• They want the CT scan like the one the K-25 screening program has. Theyalso want to
include neurological testing for mercury.
• They would like for plant medical records to be included in the programand expressed
concern about the difficulty of getting and using those records.
• They want physicians and a program outside of the Oak Ridge area becauseof its ties
with DOE and its contractors.
• They are concerned with cost and credibility because of their past experiencewith any
program funded by DOE. They cited transportation asanother impediment to
participation.
Sample responses:
"A big problem right now is... some doctor's offices just herd you in and herd you out. Theywork
for these big outfits and they just have to see so many patients in a day. It makes you feel like you
ain't getting taken care
"This is a company town where (sic) they won't admit it or not. When it comes to push and
shove, I'd rather have an independent somebody that's not tied to this area.
VI-9
"A lot of people who are weekly and monthly who did not take the BeLPT are afraid fthey get
confirmed that they're sensitive to it, it could affect their job.
"I think one of the roadblocks if they do this is getting this screening out to theentire workers, I
think it's hard to find them. That would be a real roadblock."
Topic III: Outreach/Access and Health Education/InformationResources
Questions:
1.
Participants were asked the best way to notify people of an occupationalmedical testing
program and to invite them to participate.
2. What are their current sources of health information?
3. How do participants like to get health information?
Summary of responses:
• Some of the suggestions for contacting people for participation included getting
addresses and telephone numbers from the union, word-of-mouth, brochures mailed to
their house advertising a "Y-12 health screening or ATLC health screening," the
retirement newsletter, posters at local retail stores like Wal-Mart, telephone and ralliesfor
sick workers.
• Their principal (and preferred) sources of medical information are television,the doctors'
office, or publications — such as the AARP's — sent to their homes.
Sample responses:
"Workers, if they make a list of people they work with ... especiallyfyou know them or know
their address, phone number, just write it down and when this comes about, we'll be calling
them."
"What you were talking about like telling a buddy when we start it, ask about other people.Do
you know anybody else that would be interested"
"Anything that's got Y-12, even the paper, I check it."
Observations, Y-12 Focus Groups
The two focus group sessions withcurrent and former Y-12 workers on July 8 and August
5, 2003, were yielded valuable information that will assist in structuring the medical testing
program. Of particular value was the information gathered regarding the workers' health
concerns and current medical care, types of tests desired, the preferred clinicsfor testing, and
suggestions for outreach.
Participants in the two sessions included both current and former Y-12 workers (both
hourly and salaried), all of whom were male, with an average age of 63.5 and an averageof 31.2
years working the plant.
VT-lU
Because of the classified nature of much of the work at Y-12, the focus group washeld in a
secure room in the security building at the site. Because theauthor of this report had no
clearance, the final report is based on the reports of the moderator andhealth and safety
representatives, and the transcripts created from the tape recordingsof the two sessions.
The participants expressed a distrust of both DOE and the contractors, emphasizingthat
they did not want to use clinics in Oak Ridge because of its "company town" nature.
They stated a desire for an independent occupational medical testing programthat would
not only provide a thorough physical examination, but one tailored tothe various exposures
incurred at the facility (i.e., radiation, asbestos, beryllium, mercury, solvents, acids and noise).
Both groups of participants wanted plant medical records to be incorporated into the
program if at all possible. They also felt strongly that, because of their exposures, they would
benefit from having the CT scan unit that the K-25 screening program has.
Recommendations, Y-12
•
There is a need for an occupational medical testing program
Participants clearly felt that their personal physicians did not addresstheir
occupational health concerns, nor were they qualified to do so.
•
The participants prefer local clinics in a convenient, easily accessible location
with oversight from occupational medical physician. They do not want the
clinics in Oak Ridge.
Access, cost, and transportation are some of the concerns expressed by the
participants. They did not want to use Oak Ridge clinics because of their
proximity to and influence by DOE and the contractors.
•
Participants want to include current as well as former workers.
While they feel the first priority should be the former workers, they also want to
include the current workers in the program.
• Word of mouth and direct mailings are the preferred methods for
communication.
Participants recommended, as a means of outreach, that workers write downthe
names and addresses of other potential participants. They suggested that mailings
marked "Y-12" would attract the attention of recipients.
•
All of the participants expressed a desire that the CT scan unit used at K-25 be
part of their program.
VT-il
Section VII. Epidemiologic and Health Studies Review
Epidemiologic Studies of Y-12 and ORNL Workers
Workers at Y-12 and ORNL have been the subject of numerous epidemiologicstudies.
With a few exceptions, these studies have examined the mortality experienceof these
workers. While they suffer some important limitations, these studies providedata useful
in understanding the effects of exposure to radiation and a small numberof chemical
hazards at these facilities.
As a rule, however, mortality studies done on DOE cohorts have certain important
limitations:
• Most mortality studies involve comparing the mortality experienceof employed
workers (in this case employed at Y- 12 and ORNL) with that of the general
population. This comparison population includes many individuals to sick or
disabled to work, individuals also more likely to die prematurely than people in
the workforce. This bias, known as the "healthy worker effect," results in the
underestimation of the effects of toxic exposure in the population under study. A
strong "healthy worker effect exists in studies ofOak Ridge workers.
• Most studies at Oak Ridge were undertaken long after the exposures of interest
occurred. While there are limited exposure data available (either through actual
records or retrospective dose reconstruction) for radiation exposure, there arefew
records available to quantify exposure to any of the toxic chemicals to which Y-
12 and ORNL workers were exposed.
• The potential for confounding and selection bias is significant in these studies.
The oldest facilities began employing workers in the early 1940s; these workers
have been followed the longest and constitute a sizable proportion of all workers
studied. The exposures that occurred during World War II were likely somewhat
different than subsequent exposures, since production processes changed
significantly after the war in many facilities. At the same time, employment
selection factors are likely to be of some importance. Workers who were first
employed during World War II (and who were not in the armedservices during
the war) are likely to be different than those who came to work in later years in
many respects, beyond the obvious differencein birth cohort, exposure history
and years of follow-up. As a result, for example, examination of the effect of
radiation exposure on the mortality experience of workers first employed after age
45 may actually be detecting a birth cohort effect, or the effect of some type of
selection bias in employment, rather or in addition to a radiation effect.
These limitations must be considered in reviewing the findings discussed in this needs
assessment.
In the section below, we attempt to review what can be learned from the epidemiologic
studies on Oak Ridge workers. Since different versions of most of these studies have
been published several times, we attempt to cite the most recent report, except in those
Vll-1
cases where earlier versions provide additional useful data. Negative results are not
summarized, except where they are necessary to explain a choice made in the design of
the screening program.
1. Overall and Radiation-Related Mortality
The largest study of the mortality experience of Oak Ridge workers involved 28,00
deaths among 106,000 persons employed at one Y-12, ORNL or K-25 between 1943 and
1985 (Frome et a! 1997), expanding upon an earlier study that included only whitemales
who worked before 1947 (Frome, Cragle, McLain 1990). The objective of the study was
to examine the effects of radiation exposure on mortality, since the typeof radiation
exposure was different at each facility, the facility was the primary surrogate measure
employed for radiation exposure. However, many of theseworkers worked at more than
one of the Oak Ridge facilities, posing a methodologic challenge to the authors. Rather
than exclude workers who had worked at more than one facility, as had been donein
some previous studies, the investigators employed a Poisson regression analysis to
control facility as well as for age, birth cohort, length of employment, socio-economic
status and a rough surrogate for internal radiation exposure.
Overall, the all cause (SMR=l.00, based on 27,982 deaths) and all cancer (SM.R=0.98,
6,114 deaths) mortality of the cohort were not different than those expectedbased on
national comparison rates. There were substantial differences in the mortality patterns
associated with each facility. Workers at K-25 had higher risk of mortality from non-
malignant causes than workers at Y-12 or ORNL Lung cancer was the only specific
cancer associated with external radiation (SMR=1.18, based on 1,849 lung cancerdeaths,
no 95% CI provided; among white males employed at Y-12 or ORNL,there was a dose
effect relationship between external radiation exposure and risk of death for all causes
and for cancer. External radiation dose with a ten-year lag was found to increaseoverall
risk of death by 0.31 per Sv (95% CI = 0.16, 1.01) and cancer mortality by 1.45 per Sv
(95% CI = 0 15, 3 48) Interestingly, no relationship between external radiation exposure
and leukemia was seen, perhaps suggesting that some or all of the radiation effect seen
for lung cancer may the result of an unidentified bias or the incomplete control of
confounders.
Wilkinson (2000) conducted a mortality study among female workers throughout the
DOE complex; reported that the relative risk for all cause mortality was increased among
women not monitored for radiation, in comparison to those who were monitored,at both
Y-12 (RR = 1.20, 95% CI=1.03, 1,39) and ORNL (RR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.07, 1.57). This
was also true for cancer mortality at ORNL (RR = 1.4, 95% CI=1.O, 2.0). This is likely
an artifact of the health worker effect, with women in more stable, higher paying jobs
more likely to be monitored. For all DOE sites combined, Wilkinson reportedthat
leukemia risk increased with cumulative exposure (RRIrem =1.13, 95% CI = 1.02, 1.25),
as well as associations on the edge of statistical significance between cumulative external
radiation exposure and all cancers (RRIrem = 1.03, 95% CI = .99, 1.16), breast cancer
(RR/rem = 1.05, 95% CI = .99, 1.12) and hematologic (RR/rem = 1.08, 95% CI = .99,
1.17). However, no excess breast cancer risk was seen among women employed at
Vll-2
either Y-12 (SMR=73 , 354 observed deaths, no 95% CI provided) or X-1O (SMR= 82,
48 observed deaths, no 95% CI provided). A non-significantly elevatedSMR for mouth
and buccal cancer was seen among women at X-1O, although based on small number
(SMR=148, based on 5 observed deaths), no 95% CI provided.) Increased SMRs were
also seen among X-1O workers for cancer of the esophagus (SMR=207,95% CI=67-484),
cancer of the kidney (SMR=151, 95% CI=55-328), andmental disorders (SMR=161,
95% CI=59-350).
Among Y-12 female workers, elevated mortality risk was seen for chronic and
unspecified bronchitis (SMR= 149, 95% CI=94-226) and diseases of the genitourinary
system other than nephritis, kidney infections, female genital organs (SMR= 156, 95%
CI=120- 199).
a. Y-12
Workers employed at the Y-12 plant manufacture nuclear weapons components;
historically, the primary route of exposure to radiation at the facility wasinhalation of
uranium compounds. Although no film badges were worn in the early years, it was
assumed that external (gamma) exposure was low, and that most exposure was though
inhaled uranium alpha particles and, to a lesser extent, dermal exposure to beta-emitting
uranium daughters. Airborne uranium dust levels were thought to be highest through
September 1945.
Mortality among almost 19,000 workers employed at Y-12 during 1943-1947 (followed
through 1977) was examined by Polednak and Frome (1981). This represents about half
of the workers employed during those years; women, who made up 47% of the
workforce, were not included in this study. Replicating the findings in theoverall Oak
Ridge cohort study (see above), Polednak and Frome found an SMRof 1.22 for lung
cancer (95% = CI 1.10, 1.36). The population was divided into four subgroups, Alpha
and Beta Chemistry, all Alpha and Beta Departments, electrical workers and all other.
Among these subgroups examined, the highest lung cancer SMR (1.42, 26 deaths
observed) was seen among electrical workers who did maintenance work. No excess lung
cancer was seen among the chemical workers "in Alpha and Beta Chemistry"who had
higher uranium dust exposures, or those who worked in all Alphaand Beta Departments.
The fourth group examined "all others" had a small excess risk (SMR=1.13, based on 182
lung cancer deaths.
White male workers employed at Y-12 between 1947 and 1974 (followed through 1979)
are the subject of another series of mortality analyses. Checkoway et al (1988) reported
that among these workers, there were elevated risks of mortality from cancers of the lung
(SMR=1.36, 95% CI 1.09, 1.67, 89 observed deaths) and central nervous system
(SMR= 1.80, 95% CI 0.96,3.02, 14 observed deaths). In contrast with earlier studies,
individual radiation monitoring data were available for slightly more than half of the
workers in the cohort, and the investigators constructed models to examine the
relationship of dose (alpha or gamma, and cumulative level), latency andrisk. Depending
upon the model used, the risk of lung cancer among those whose cumulative dose was 5
Vll-3
or more rem, was more than 4 times higher that of those receivingless than 1 rem. No
comparable dose-effect trend was seen for cancers of the brain and central nervous
system Of the 6,781 white male workers who were employedat least 30 days at Y-12,
2,222 (33%) has external radiation (gamma) exposure >0-.49 rem, 1,264 (19%)had
between .5 and .99 rem, 1504 (22%) had between 1 and 4.99 rem, and 132 (2%)had 5 or
more rem. No analyses by job tityle or department were reported.
Although the Checkoway study was relatively large (6,781 cohort members, of whom
862 were known to have died), the increases in lung cancer risks associated with the
highest radiation exposure were based on a small number of lung cancerdeaths. In spite
off this, the authors on the study concluded "the observed dose-response trends indicate
potential carcinogenic effects to the lung of relatively low-dose radiation."
Loomis and Wolf (1994) extended the follow-up period of this study through 1990.
Mortality from lung and brain cancer remained elevated, and the authors reportincreased
risk of some lymphatic cancers, as well as cancer of the pancreas, prostate and kidney.
An excess in lung cancer mortality was seen (SMR=1.17, 95% CI 1.01-1.34, 202 deaths
observed) Further analysis of the lung cancer mortality patterns found that much of the
lung cancer excess appeared to be limited to workers who werefirst employed at Y-12
between 1947 and 1954 (SMR=1.27, 161 deaths observed, no 95% CI provided).The
excess lung cancer mortality first manifested in the 1955-1964 time period,and decreased
after 1979. The SMIR for lung cancer among female workers was 0.78, based on 5 deaths.
Loomis and Wolf conclude: "Lung cancer mortality among these workers warrants
continued surveillance because of the link between internal alpha radiation exposure and
this disease, but other agents, notably beryllium, also merit consideration as potential
causes of lung cancer." (p. 131, Loomis and Wolf, 1996)
Lung cancer risk at Y-12 has also been examined using a nested case control method,
with many of the cases coming from the studies discussed above. Dupree et al (1993;
1995) identified 787 lung cancer cases among workers at Y-12 or twoother uranium
processing facilities (Mallinckrodt Chemical Works and Fernald FeedMaterials
Production Center) for at least 183 days. Controls were matched to cases on race, gender,
date of birth and date of hire (± 3 years), and facility. It was not an uncommon practice
for workers to move from one ABC facility to another. Of the 787 cases, 180, or 23%
worked at more than one facility. 567 (72%) were first employed at Y-12 during the
1943-1947 period and 142 (18%) after 1947; in total, 7609 (9077%) cases were first
employed at Y-12. This is of interest, because work at Y-12 contributed the largest
amount of exposure, and the longest periods of follow-up after exposure began, inthe
study.
The Dupree study (1995) detected a non-statistically significant two-fold excess risk of
lung cancer (OR = 2.05, 95% CI =0.20, 20.70) among workers exposed to 25 centigrays
or higher. Although there were no indications of a dose-response relationshipbetween
lung cancer and internal exposure to uranium dust, the data suggested an effectfrom
internal dose and external radiation among workers hired after age 45; as a result, the
Vll-4
authors felt there findings were not inconsistent with those reported by Checkoway et aT
(1988). Using the same exposure data, this study had many of the same limitations as
the other Y-12 studies discussed above In particular, the authors acknowledged the
potential for exposure misclassification, especially among workers from the earlier Y-12
employment cohort If this misclassification was random, the effectwould likely be to
reduce the measured effect of radiation exposure, resulting in an underestimate of the
radiation effect.
b. ORNL
The mortality experience of ORNL workers has been examined in several studies. The
first published study limited to ORNL employees was by Checkoway et al (1985),
updated by Wing et al (1991) The later analysis included 8381 men employedbetween
1943 and 1972 followed through 1984 The only significant excess seen overall was
leukemia (SMR = 1.63; 95% CI = 1.08, 2.35; there were 28 observed deaths). Non-
significant excesses were seen for cancers of the pancreas (SMR = 1.09; 95% CI = 0.71,
1.61; 25 observed deaths), prostate (SMR = 1.05; 95% CI = 0.68, 1.53; 26 observed
deaths) and brain!CNS (SMR = 1.04; 95% CI =0.58, 1.72; 15 observed deaths), along
with lymphosacrcomalreticulosarcoma (SMR = 1.05; 95% CI =0.48, 1.99; 9 observed
deaths). Using internal comparisons, the investigators found that all cause mortality
appeared to be related to radiation dose, a finding that was not seen inthe earlier study of
the same cohort by Checkoway et al, perhaps because of the shorter follow-up time of the
earlier studies.
This radiation effect was pnmanly associated with cancer mortality, taking SES into
account and with a 20 year time lag, the authors found an approximately 5% excess risk
of cancer mortality for every lOmSv (1 rem) of dose (p=.OO1). This estimate is
substantially higher than the radiation effect estimated from data gathered from survivors
of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki nuclear blasts. Among specific cancers, the authors a 5%
excess lung cancer mortality risk for each 10 rnSv (p=.O6), and a 9% excess for leukemia
(p=.44).
The differences between these results and those from the Japanese survivor cohorts
underscore the limitations and uncertainties of dose-effect estimates. While there are few
if any environmental dose-effect relationships about which we have more and better data
than we do for radiation, dose-effect models drawn from different populations have
provided discordant models. Differences between estimates, and model are probably
attributable to incomplete or inaccurate exposure measurement, or uncontrolled
confounding. It is unlikely, however, that studies in the United States will provide
significant clarification of the questions raised by these differences, because the mortality
experience of most of the major US radiation-exposed populations have alreadybeen
examined and analyzed.
A subsequent analysis (Wing et aT 1993) of the ORNL cohort replicated these same
results after adjustment for the potential effects of exposure to beryllium, lead and
mercury, as well as for selection biases associated with war-related employment patterns.
Vll-5
Richardson and Wing (1999) followed this cohort through 1990, and reported that,
lagging the data, radiation doses received after age 45 appear (7% per 10 mSv, SE=2.2)
to have a greater impact on cancer mortality risk than exposures that occur at younger
ages (5% per 10 mSv, SE=1 .5). Further, they reported a positiveassociation between
radiation dose after age 45 and risk of non-malignant respiratory disease (5% per 10 mSv,
SE=2.9).
This age effect has been suggested in other studies as well. Wing et al (2000) conducted a
case control study of workers who dies of multiple myeloma at four facilities, including
ORNL. While lifetime cumulative radiation dose was not associated with increased risk
of multiple myeloma mortality, exposures at older ages appear to increase risk.
Wilkinson (2000) examined mortality among female workers employed at ORNL, and
found that excesses of hematologic cancer (SMR = 1.25, 95% CI = 1.07, 1.47), and
within that, for leukemia (SMR = 1.32, 95% CI = 1.12, 1.55). Non-significant excesses
were seen for cancers of the esophagus (SMR = 2.07, 95% CI = 0.67, 4.84), kidney
(SMR = 1.51, 95% CI = 0.55, 3.28, and mental disorders (SMR = 1.61, 95% CI = 0.59,
3.50).
In addition, investigators examined the mortality experience in a combined cohort from
ORNL, Hanford and Rocky Flats, publishing several articles on the study. In a 1993
publication, for example, Gilbert, Cragle and Wiggs found that cancersof the esophagus
and larynx and Hodgkin's Disease was significantly correlated with radiation exposure,
with the esophagus and larynx cancer excesses seen primarily among the ORNL workers.
Radiation exposure at ORNL also appeared to be associated with an increased risk of
cancer mortality overall (RR=1 .2 per Sv, 90% CI <0, 3.7), with greater effects being seen
among those developing cancer at older ages.
1. Beryllium
Exposure to beryllium was extensive at the Y-12 facility. By July, 2003, morethan 4,000
current and former Y-12 workers were tested as part of DOE's Chronic Beryllium
Disease (CBD) Surveillance Program. Of these 133 (3.3%) were found to have beryllium
sensitization. Ninety of the 133 completed follow-up clinical evaluations, with 46 cases
of CBD diagnosed in this group.
Beryllium exposure appears to have been less common at ORNL The surveillance
program has tested 438 current and former ORNL workers, and have found 8 (1.8%)
sensitized. No cases of CBD have been diagnosed at ORNL.
DOE reports have documented relatively recent exposure to beryllium. The 1996 DOE
Beryllium Information Survey Report noted that Y-12 reported 158 exposed workers, and
ORNL 51. Y- 12 reported that maximum exposure beryllium levels that year exceeded the
DOE standard in effect at that time, 2.0 uglm3.
Vll-6
2. Mercury
The mortality experience of workers exposed to mercury at Y-12 was examinedin a
study published in 1984 (Cragle et al). Using data from mercury urinalysis testing, the
cohort was divided into exposed and non-exposed subcohorts, and the exposed group
further divided into high exposure and low exposure groups. No significant mercury-
related differences in mortality patterns were detected. As with other Y- 12 studies,the
investigators found a (non-significant) excess of lung cancer in these workers,
(SMR134, 42 deaths observed, p>.0S, no CI provided) but alsofound a similar excess in
non-mercury exposed Y-12 workers (SMR=1.34, 71 observed deaths, p.<.O5), suggesting
that mercury exposure was not associated with detectable mortality excesses in this
population. The authors note in the paper, however, that mortalityis not the preferred
endpoint to use in studies of the effects of mercury exposure.
In the middle 1980s, long after the period of high-level exposure to mercury at Y-12had
occurred (1953-1965), a study of neurological effects was undertaken by scientists
associated with the University of Michigan (Albers et al 1988). Clinical examinations
were given to 502 workers, of whom 247 had been exposed 20 to35 years previously.
Urine mercury levels were available for exposed workers
Both peak and cumulative mercury exposure were found to be correlated with each other
and with the presence of selected neurological abnormalities. Workers whose peak
exposure exceeded O/6mgIL were found to have decreased strength, coordination and
sensation, as well as increased tremor and prevalence of Babinski and snout reflexes.
Workers with clinical neuropathy had significantly higher peak exposure levels
(0.85mg/L vs. 0.61 mgIL) than normal workers. Mercury exposure duration wasnot
correlated with these conditions.
Ten years later, a follow-up study was conducted involving 104 mercury-exposed
workers and 101 non-exposed workers drawn from the same population (Letz et al 2000).
For the most part, mercury exposure had ended 30 years before the clinical examinations
were performed and the mean age of the study subjects was, at the timeof examination,
71 years. A range of peripheral nerve function outcomes, principally defined
electrophysiologically, were found to be statistically significantly associated with
cumulative mercury exposure, as were the results of the hand-eye coordination test and
postural tremor. Importantly, they found no relationship between mercury exposure and
dementia or any measure of cognitive function. The authors note that these associations
were observed despite greater mortality in the exposed (compared withthe unexposed)
group, and sizable loss to follow-up.
3. Asbestos
While the occurrence of asbestos-related disease has not been studies in production
workers at ORNL or Y-12, data from the medical surveillance program of Oak Ridge
construction workers strongly suggests that asbestos-related disease will be detected in
production workers in these facilities. According to Dement et al (2003), 19%of
Vll-7
construction workers employed at one or more of DOE Oak Ridge sites had radiographic
abnormalities associated with asbestos exposure
4. Welding
Mortality among white, male welders employed at Y-12 and ORNL 1943 through 1985
was examined in a series of studies (Polednak 1981; Wells, Cragleand Tankersly, 1998).
The authors of the 1998 study assert that stainless steel welding was common at Y-12,
and that the major contaminants were iron and chromium. Welders at both facilitiesalso
worked with aluminum The subpopulation employed at Y-12 or ORNL had elevated
risk of cancer of the prostate (SMR = 2.33, 95% CI
1.00,4.60) and lung (SMR = 1.34,
95% CI = 0.87, 1.98).
5.
Phosgene
Significant phosgene exposure occurred in the early years at Y-12. Polednak (1980),
then Polednak and Hollis (1985) examined the mortality experience of Y-12 chemical
workers who worked in departments where daily exposures to phosgene occurred. A
slightly elevated increase (SMR=1.21, 95% CI =0.86, 1.65) in all-cause mortality was
seen among male workers who were acutely exposed to highlevels of phosgene, with an
SMR of 2.66 (95% CI = 0.86, 6.22) for non-malignant respiratory disease. Included in
this is at least one death that appears to be directly attributable to acute phosgene
exposure.
6. Central Nervous System (CNS) Cancers
A study examining the relationship of CNS cancer with radiation and chemical exposure
was conducted using the case-control method. The investigators selected study subjects
from Y-12 and ORNL. There was no clear association with either radiation or any of 26
chemical exposures, although an increased risk of CNS cancer (OR = 7.0, 95% CI = 1.2,
41) was observed among those employed for more than 20 years (Carpenter et al, 1987;
Carpenter et al, 1988).
Vll-8
References
Albers JW, Kallenbach LR, Fine U, Langoif GD, Wolfe RA, Donofrio PD, Alessi
AG, Stoip-Smith KA, Bromberg MB. Neurological abnormalities associatedwith remote
occupational elemental mercury exposure. Annals of Neurology 1988; 24:651-659.
Carpenter AV, Flanders WD, Frome EL, Crawford-Brown DJ, Fry SA. CNS cancers and
radiation exposure: a case-control study among workers at two nuclear facilities. Journal
of Occupational Medicine 1987 ;29 :601-604.
Carpenter AV, Flanders WD, Frome EL, Tankersley WG, Fry SA.Chemical exposures
and central nervous system cancers: a case-control study among workers at two nuclear
facilities. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 1988; 13:351-362.
Checkoway H, Mathew RM, Shy CM, Watson JE Jr, Tankersley WG, Wolf SH;
Smith C, Fry SA. Radiation, work experience, and cause specific mortality among
workers at an energy research laboratory. British Journal of Industrial Medicine
1985 ;42(8):525-33.
Checkoway H, Pearce N, Crawford-Brown DJ, Cragle DL. Radiation doses and cause:
specific mortality among workers at a nuclear matenals fabncation plant Amencan
Journal of Epidemiology 1988; 127:255-366. Comment in: American Journal of
Epidemiology 1989; 129:639-640.
Cragle DL, Hollis DR, Qualters JR, Tankersley WG, Fry SA. A mortality study of men
exposed to elemental mercury. Journal of Occupational Medicine 1984; 26:817-821.
Cragle D, Letz R. Undated. A study of the health effects of exposure to elemental
mercury: A follow-up of mercury exposed workers atthe Y-12 Plant in Oak Ridge,
Tennessee. Final Report: NIOSH Contract No. 200-93-2629, 1997. Oak Ridge
Associated Universities and Emory University.
Dement JM, Welch L, Bingham E, Cameron B, Rice C, Quinn P, Ringen 2003.
Surveillance of respiratory diseases among construction and trade workers at Department
of Energy nuclear sites. Am J md Med. Jun;43(6):559-73.
Dupree E, Watkins J, Ingle J, Wallace P, West C, Tankersley W. Riskof lung cancer
among uranium processing workers. Am J Epidmiol 138:640, 1993.
Dupree EA, Watkins JP, Ingle JN, Wallace PW, West CM, Tankersley WG. Uranium
dust exposure and lung cancer risk in four uranium processing operations. Epidemiology
1995; 6:370-375.
Vll-9
Frome EL, Cragle DL, McLain RW. Poisson regression analysis of the mortality among a
cohort of WWII nuclear Industry Workers. Radiation Research 1990; 123:138-152.
Frome EL, Cragle DL, Watkins JP, Wing S, Shy CM, Tankersley WG, West CM. A
mortality study of employees of the nuclear industry in Oak Ridge, Tennessee. Radiation
Research 1997; 148:64-80. Published erratum appears in Radiat Res 1997; 148:297-
298.]
Gilbert ES, Cragle DL, Wiggs LD. Updated analyses of combined mortality data for
workers at the Hanford Site, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and Rocky Flats Weapons
Plant. Radiation Research 1993; 136:408-421.
Letz R, Gerr F, Cragle D, Green RC, Watkins J, Fidler AT. Residual neurologic deficits
30 years after occupational exposure to elemental mercury. NeuroToxicology 2000;
21:459-474.
Loomis DP, Wolf SH. Mortality of workers at a nuclear materials production plant at Oak
Ridge, Tennessee, 1947-1990. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 1996; 29:131-
141. Comment in: American Journal of Industrial Medicine 1997; 31:121.
Polednak AP. Mortality among men occupationally exposed to phosgene in 1943-
1945. Environmental Research 1980; 22:357-367.
Polednak AP. Mortality among welders, including a group exposed to nickel oxides.
Archives of Environmental Health 1981; 36:235-241.
Polednak AP, Frome EL. Mortality among men employed between 1943 and 1947
at a uranium-processing plant. Journal of Occupational Medicine 1981; 23:169-178.
Polednak AP, Hollis DR. Mortality and causes of death among workers exposed to
phosgene in 1943-45. Toxicology and Industrial Health 1985; 1:137-15 1
Richardson DB, Wing S. Radiation and mortality of workers at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory: Positive associations for doses received at older ages. Environmental Health
Perspectives 1999; 107:649-656.
Wilkinson GS, Trieff, N, Graham, R. 2000. Study of mortality among female nuclear
weapons workers Buffalo, NY Department of Social and Preventative Medicine, School
of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Buffalo, State University of New
York; (DHIEIS Grant Numbers: 1RO1 OHO3274, R01/CCR214546, R01/CCR61 2934-01,
Final Report.)
Wing 5, Richardson D, Wolf 5, Mihlan G, Crawford-Brown D, Wood J. 2000. A case
control study of multiple myeloma at four nuclear facilities. Annals of Epidemiology
10:144-153.
VII- 10
Wing S, Shy CM, Wood JL, Wolf S, Cragle DL, Frome EL. Mortality among workers at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Evidence of radiation effects in follow-up through 1984.
Journal of the American Medical Association 1991; 265:1397-1402. [Published errata
appear in JAMA 1991; 266:657.]
Wing 5, Shy CM, Wood JL, Wolf S, Cragle DL, Tankersley W, Frome EL. Job factors,
radiation and cancer mortality at Oak Ridge National Laboratory: follow-up through
1984. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 1993; 23:265-279. Published errata
appear in American Journal of Industrial Medicine 1993; 23:673.
vil-li
Attachments and Appendices: Exposure Assessment
Attachment 1: Job Exposure Information Sheet
Attachment 2: Descriptive Building Report
Appendix Al: X-lO Risk Mapping Results
Appendix Al: Y-l2 Risk Mapping Results
Appendix Bl:Y-12 External Dose
Appendix B2:Y-12 Urinalysis Data
Appendix B3:X-lO External Dose
Appendix B4:X-lO Urinalysis Data
Appendix B5:X-lO In Vivo Data
Appendix Cl: Y-12 Job Titles
Appendix C2: X-lO Job Titles
Appendix C3: Y-12 and X-lO Department Names and Numbers
Appendix C4: X-lO Department Names and Numbers and Division Titles
Appendix C5: X-lO Building Names and Building Numbers
Appendix Dl: Y-12 H&S Report Air Sampling Summary
Appendix D2: Y-12 H&S Report Urine Data Summary
Appendix D3: X-lO Health Physics Report Urine Data Summary
Appendix D4: X-lO Health Physics Report Occurrence Data Summary
Appendix El: X-lO Questionnaire Results Summary
Appendix E2: Y-l2 Questionnaire Results Summary
Appendix F: External Dose Summary Results
Attachment 1
Job Exposure Information Sheet
Process Area and Description
Process Number
(Assigned number)
Building Name / # ___________
Map ID Number
Chenlicals or Agents
(Assign a number to chemicals added to listand use number in lower table as needed)
Job Title or Group
Chemical(s)
Level of
Frequency of
Comments
.
•
(# from list)
Exposure
Exposure
.
(High, Med,
(Sometimes,
.
.
.
Low)
Always)
•-J-)- 1
Attachment 2
Descriptive Building Report
Date Conducted: __________________
Numberof Participants.
Investigators Names: _________________
1. Site Name: ______________
2. Building Name: __________________________________
3. Building Number _______________
4. Years of Operation
5. Summaryof Participants Work Histories
(Describe the participan3 job titles, nature of their work, and years of experience — Do not identify
participants)
6. Descriptipn and History of Major Processes or Operations
8/22/2003
Risk_Map_session_summary
Mt z —j
7. Describe the major exposures that took place within the building over time
,
S
8. Describe the Workforce within the Building over time
9. Other Information of Interest
(This section may include accidents, incidents, information regarding the changes that took place over time
within the building, etc.)
8/22/2003
Risk_Map_session_summary
10. Industrial Hygiene / Health Physics
a. Summary of External Dose measurements.
(type of dosimetry, primary radiation, frecuency)
b. Summary of Internal Dose monitoring
(type, radionuclide tested for, frequency, specials)
c. Contamnation Control and Monitoring Practices'
d. Was any IH monitoring performed? If so, for what substances? Frequency?
8/22/2003
Risk_Mapsession_summary
e. Summary ÔfPPE requirements and practices over time?
, ,
f. Summary of Work Practices over time?
OTHERCOMMENTS:
8/22/20 03
Risk_Map_session_summary
Appendix A.
A-i
X-1O Risk Mapping Results
, S
X-10 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
HF 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
- 
Maintenance 
UF6 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Maintenance -- 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- Fluoride Volatility Process 
Maintenance 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Chemical Operators 
Tritium 
High Rad. Level Analytical Lab. 
2026 
storage 
Fluoride 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Chemical Operatbrs 
Fluoride 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Maintenance 
) 
) 
) 
neutron 
Bulk Shield Reactor 
3010 
. 
HPs 
Beryllium 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Maintenance 
- 
Beryllium 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Chemical Operators 
1-131 
Graphite Reactor 
3001 
. 
Plutonium 
Graphite Reactor 
3001 
- 
Chemical 
Building Name 
1 Building Number 
Process Area 
I 
Job 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
- Maintenance 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg• 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Chemical Operators 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Maintenance 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
-Pipe Tunnel 
Maintenance 
Fission Products 
High Rad. Level Analytical Lab. 
2026 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Basement - 
Maintenance 
UF6 
Séperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Operators 
Chemical 
HF 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Chemical Operators 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Maintenance 
External radiation 
Bulk Shield Reactor 
3010 
Research Scientists - 
neutron 
Bulk Shield Reacior 
3010 
Research Scientists 
External radiation 
Bulk Shield Reactor 
3010 
Reactor Operators 
neutron 
Bulk Shield Reactor 
- 
3010 
Reactor Operators 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
- 
Maintenance 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Chemical Operators 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Chemical Operators 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Chemical Operators 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Basement 
Chemical Operators 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Basement 
- 
Chemical Operators 
- 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
-3019 
- 
Basement 
Maintenance 
External radiation 
Bulk Shield Reactor 
3010 
HPs 
- 
3019 
3019 
3019 
3019 
penthouse 
penthouse 
Summary Report 
X-10 Risk Mapping Results 
- Purex Pulse Columns 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Maintenance 
Foreman 
- 
UF6 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Foreman 
Nitric Acid 
Fluoride 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Maintenance- 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Chemical Operators 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Maintenance 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
-3019 
- 
Purex 
- 
Maintenance 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Maintenance 
PCB5 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- penthouse 
Maintenance 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Chemical Operators 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Chemical Operators 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Chemical Operators 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Chemical Operators 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Chemical Operators 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Maintenance 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
- 
Maintenance 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
-Maintenance 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Chemical Operators 
External radiation 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Chemical Operators 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
penthouse 
Chemical Operators 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Chemical Operators 
Asbestos 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Chemical Operators 
PCBs 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperatios Bldg 
Chemical Operators 
Maintenance 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Maintenance 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Mainteilance 
Asbestos 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Maintenance 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Analytical Lab - A Lab 
chemists 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Analytical Lab - A Lab 
chemists 
3019 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Chemical Operators 
Chemical Operators 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Chemical Operators 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Maintenance 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns - 
Maintenance 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
-. 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Instrument Mechanic 
Welder 
Separations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Separations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Instrument Mechanic 
HF 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
UF6 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Electrician 
HF 
Separations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
UF6 
Separations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Instrument Mechanic 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Foreman 
Heat 
Fluoride 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Electrician 
- 
Heat 
Fluoride 
j 
) 
X-10 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Fluoride 
Separations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Beryllium 
Separations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
- 
Electrician 
Beryllium 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Pipefltters 
Beryllium 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Millwrights 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Millwrights 
Beryllium 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Foreman 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
- 
Job 
- 
HF 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Foreman 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Electrician 
Internal radiation 
Separations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Millwrights - 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Foreman 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Electrician 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Instrument Mechanic 
Mechanic 
External radiation 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Instrument 
Mechanic 
Internal radiation 
Separations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility. Process 
Instrument 
Mechanic 
Beryllium 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Fluoride 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Pipefitters 
U F6 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Pipefitters 
HF 
- 
Separations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Pipefitters 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Pipefitters 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Pipefitters 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Pipefitters 
Fluoride 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Millwrights 
UF6 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Millwrights 
HF 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Millwrights 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Millwrights 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Foreman 
Foreman 
Foreman 
- 
penthouse 
3019 
3019 
penthouse 
X-l 0 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Welder 
HF 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Welder 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
, 
penthouse 
Millwrights 
UF6 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Welder 
PCBs 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
penthouse 
Foreman 
Beryllium 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Welder 
- 
Asbestos 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Foreman 
) 
) 
) 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
I 
Job 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Welder 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Maintenance 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Foreman 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Pipe Tunnel 
- 
Electrician 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Instrument Mechanic 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
' 
Millwrights 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg . 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
- 
Foreman 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Electrician 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Instrument Mechanic 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Welder 
Heat 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Internal radiation 
t 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Weldec 
Internal radiation 
' 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunhel 
iittenance 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Pipe Tunnel 
Instrument Mechanic 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
' 
Welder 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
- 
, 
Foreman 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
. 
Maintenance 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Foreman 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Pipefitters 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Pipe Tunnel• 
Pipefitters 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Pipefitters 
Hydorlic Fluids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Millwrights 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel' 
Millwrights 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Millwrights 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Pipe Tunnel 
Electrician - - 
External radiation 
1 
Sepèrations Bldg 
3019 
Fluoride Volatility Process 
Welder 
X-1 0 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Purex 
Foreman 
PCBs 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Welder 
Asbestos 
. 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Instrument Mechanic 
PCBs 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Instrument Mechanic 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Welder 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
. 
Purex 
Foreman 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Purex Pulse Columns. 
Foreman 
Heat 
. 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Pipefitters 
) 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
. 
penthouse 
Welder 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
- 
Foreman 
Internal radiation 
Seperatiohs Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Foreman 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Welder 
Asbestos 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Welder 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex. 
Foreman 
- 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Foreman 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Foreman 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
- 
Job 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Millwrights 
Asbestos 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Millwrights 
PCBs 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Millwrights 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Pipefitters- 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
. 
Pipefitters 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Pipefitters 
Asbestos 
Seperatsons Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Pipefitters 
PCBs 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
penhoUse 
Pipefillers 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
. 
penthouse 
Electrician 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Electrician 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg . 
. 
3019 
penthouse 
Electrician 
Asbestos 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Electrician 
PCBs 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Electrician 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Instrument Mechanic 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Instrument Mechanic 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
penthouse 
Instrument Mechanic 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
- 
Foemän 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
. 
- 
Foreman 
) 
) 
X-1 0 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Instrument Mechanic 
Nitric Acid 
1 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Electrician 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
- 3019 
- 
Purex Pulse Columns 
- 
Electrician 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
- 
Instrument Mechanic 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
- 
- 
Electrician 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
- 
Millwrights 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Millwrights 
- 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
- Millwrights 
- 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Millwrights 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Millwrights - 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Millwrights 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Millwrights 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Instrument Mechanic 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Instrument Mechanic 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Pipefitters 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Electrician 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Purex 
Electrician 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns. 
Electrician 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Electrician 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Pipefitters 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Pipefitters 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
- 
Pipefitters 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Purex 
Pipefitters 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Pipefitters 
- 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns - 
Electrician 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Millwrights 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Millwrights 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
. Purex Pulse Columns• 
Millwrights 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Instrument Mechanic 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Pipefitters 
-. 
- 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
. 
Seperations Bldg 
.3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Pipefitters 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Pipefitters 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Electricin 
Tributyiphosphate (TBP) 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Electrician 
Millwrights 
Millwrights 
Electrician 
Sampling Column 
SampIig Column 
Sampling Column 
• 
Sampling Column 
Sampling Column 
3019 
— 
Pipefitters 
3019 
3019 
3019 
3019 
3019 
3019 
3019 
3019 
Summary Report 
X-1 0 Risk Mapping Results 
- 
Electrician 
Instrument Mechanic 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
- 
Sampling Column 
Instrument Mechanic 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Sampling Column 
Welder 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperatons Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
SeperationS Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Sampling Column 
Sampling Column 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Sampling Column 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
3019 
Sampling Column- 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Sampling Column 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Sampling Column 
Sampling Column 
Pipefitters 
- 
External radiation 
Internal radiation 
External raation 
Internal radiation 
External radiation 
Internal radiation 
External radiation 
Internal radiation 
External radiation 
Sampling Column 
Chemical Operators 
Chemical Operators 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
3019 
Sampling Column 
Sampling Column 
Group Leader 
Group Leader 
Sampling 
Sampling 
Shift Supervisor 
Shift Supervisor 
Foreman 
Foreman 
External radiation 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
3019 
3019 
Sampling Column 
External radiation 
Internal radiation 
External radiation 
Internal radiation 
External radiation 
Chemical 
i 
Building Name 
Building 
Purex Pulse Columns 
- 
Instrument Mechanic 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Instrument Mechanic 
Instrument Mechanic 
Instrument Mechanic 
Instrument Mechanic 
External radiation 
3019 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Welder 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Welder 
Nitric Acid 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Sampling Column 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Nitric Acid 
- 
Seperations Bldg 
Purex 
Welder 
Heat 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Welder 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Welder 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
— 
3019 
Purex 
Welder 
Nitric Acid 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex 
Welder 
Welder 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Internal radiation 
3019 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Welder 
Welder 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
Purex Pulse Columns 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
. 
- 
HPs 
. 
. 
Research Scientists- 
Hot Ce!ls and glove boxes 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
3038 
3038 
- 
3038 
3038 
3038 
Summary Report 
X-I0 Risk Mapping Results 
- 
. 
- 
HFs- 
Research Scientists 
ORR 
ORR 
ORR 
Chemical Operators 
Maintenance 
Maintenance 
Maintenance 
Maintenance 
adloisotope Analytical & Packing 
. 
3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Maintenance 
adiolsotope Analytical & Packing BId 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Maintenance 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing BId 
HotCells md glove boxes 
Maintenance 
HPs 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing Bid 
3042 
ORR 
3042 
3042 
3042 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing Bid 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing BId 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing Bid 
adiolsotope Analytical & Packing BId 
Bid 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building 
Sampling Column 
- 
Welder 
Internal radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
Cell Ventillation 
Maintenance 
Acids 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
3019 
Cell Ventiliation 
Maintenance 
Internal radiation 
External radiation 
Seperations Bldg 
Seperations Bldg 
3019 
Cell Ventillation 
Purex 
Maintenance 
Molybdenum 
Tritium 
— External radiation 
neutron 
External radiation 
neutron 
— 
Pu-239 
Seperations Bldg 
F 
3019 
3028 
Hot cells 
Curium 
- 
Cobalt 
Radioisotope Processing Bldg 
Hot cells 
Radioisotope Processing Bldg F 
3028 
3029 
Hot cells 
Hot cells 
Curium 
Radioisoiope PioeessiriQ bldg E 
3029 
Cobalt 
Radioisotope Processing Bldg E 
3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Alpha 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing BId 
3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
HPs 
lodine-131 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing Bid 
BId 
3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
HPs 
• 
Technecium-99m 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing 
3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
HPs 
Strontium-90 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing BId 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
HPs 
Cesium-I 37 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing Bid 
3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
HPs 
— 
Molybdenum 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing Bid 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
HPs 
Tritium 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing Bid 
3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Chemical Operators 
Alpha 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing BId 
Bid 
3038 
3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Chemical Operators 
lodine-131 
Technecium-99m 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing 
achoisotope Analytical & Packing BId 
3038 
:3038 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Chemical Operators 
Chemical Operators 
Strontium-90 
Cesium-i 37 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing BId — 
3038 
3038. 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Chemical Operators 
adioisotope Analytical & Packing BId 
Bid 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
Chemical Operators 
Molybdenum 
Tritium 
Alpha 
Iodine-i 31 
Technecium-99m 
Strontium-90 
Cesium-i 37 
Summary Report 
) 
) 
X-10 Risk Mapping Results 
Curium 
Radioisotope Development Lab. 
3047 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
. 
neutron 
LITR 
3085 
-Training Reactor 
Reactor Operators 
Chemical 
I 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
3505 
Purex Production 
Technicians 
Heat 
3505 
3505 
Purex Production 
Technicians 
Internal radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
Purex Production 
Production 
3505 
3505 
Purex Production 
Purex Production 
- 
Group 
Group Leader 
Leader 
3505 
- 
Purex Production 
— Group 
Leader 
Nitric Acid 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex Production 
Production 
Group 
Group Leader 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
- 
neutron 
LITR 
3085 
Training 
External radiation 
LITR 
3085 
Training Reactor 
Research Scientists 
External radiation 
LITR 
3085 
Training Reactor 
Reactor Operators 
Chemical 
Heat 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex Production 
Operators 
Chemical 
Internal radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
- 
Purex Production 
Chemical 
External radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex Production 
Production 
-Chemical Operators 
Nitric Acid 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Chemical 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex Production 
Operators 
External radiation 
Interim Manipulator Repair Facility 
3074 
Manipulator Shop 
Millwrights 
Internal radiation 
Interim Manipulator Repair Facility 
3074 
Manipulator Shop 
Millwrights 
Electrician 
External radiation 
hitrirn Manipulator Repair Facility 
3074 
Manipulator Shop 
Electrician 
Internal radiation 
Interim Manipulator Repair Facility 
3074 
Manipulator Shop 
HPs 
neutron 
LITR 
3085 
Training Reactor 
HPs 
Research Scientists 
External radiation 
LITR 
3085 
Training Reactor 
External radiation 
ORR 
3042 
Reactor Operators 
Reactor 
neutron 
ORR 
3042 
Operators 
- 
Technicians 
External radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Technicians 
Nitric Acid 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Technicians 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex Production 
Technicians 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex Production 
Production 
Technicians 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Leader 
Heat 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
Internal radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
External radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
Tributyiphosphate (TBP) 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex Production 
Chemical Operators 
Chemical 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
lrridium-192 
Radioisotope Development Lab. 
3047 
— 
Tritium 
Radioisotope Development Lab. 
3047 
Hot Cells and glove boxes 
- 
- 
Summary Report 
Fission Product Development Lab 
Hot cells 
Millwrights 
Fission Product Development Lab 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
3517 
Hot cells 
- 
) 
X-I 0 Risk Mapping Results 
Hot cells 
Millwrights 
- 
Sheet Metal Workers 
Cesium-I 37 
Fission Product Development Lab 
Hot cells 
Sheet Metal Workers 
Cerium-I 44 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
Hot cells 
Sheet Metal Workers 
Strontium-90 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
Hot cells 
Welders 
Cesium-I 37 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
Hot cells 
Welders 
Cerium-144 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
Hot cells 
- 
Welcfers 
Strontium-90 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
. 
Hot cells 
Instrument Mechanic 
Cesium-l 37 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
. 
3517 
Hot cells 
Instrument Mechanic 
Cerium-I44 
Fission Product Development Lab 
. 
Pipefitters 
Pipefitters 
Cerium-i 44 
Fission Product Development Lab - 
cells 
Strontium-90 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
- 
Hot cells 
Millwrights 
3517 
- 
Cesium-I 37 
Cerium-i 44 
Strontium-90 
3505 
Purex 
Production 
Foreman 
Heat 
3505 
Purex 
Production 
Foreman 
Internal radiation- 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Production 
- 
Foreman 
External radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Production 
3505 
Purex Production 
Maintenance 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
3505 
Hot Cells 
Transuranics 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
3517 
Hot cells 
Chemical Operators 
Cesium-I 37 
Fission Product Development Lab 
Hot cells 
Chemical Operators 
Cerium-144 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
Chemical Operators 
Strontium-90 
Cesium-I 37 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
Hot cells 
Pipefitters 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
Hot 
Hot cells 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number I 
Production 
- 
Group Leader 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
j 
Product!on 
Group Leader 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
-- 
Foreman 
Nitric Acid 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Production 
Foreman 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Foreman 
-Thbui.ylphusphate (TBP) 
Metal Recovery Bldg: 
3505 
Production 
Foreman 
Amsco (Kerosene) 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Purex Production 
Maintenance 
Heat 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex Production 
Maintenance 
Internal radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Production 
Maintenance 
External radiation 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Production 
Maintenance 
Nitric Acid 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Production 
Maintenance 
Aluminum Nitrate 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
3505 
Purex 
Purex Production 
Maintenance 
Tributylphosphate (TBP) 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
Metal Recovery Bldg. 
) 
. 
Hot cells 
Hot cells 
cells 
- 
7710 
7900 
power 
- 
3517 
3517 
3517 
X-IO RiskMapping Results 
Summary Report 
DSAR 
HEIR 
HFIR 
Fission Product Development Lab 
Fission Product Development Lab 
Fission Product Development Lab 
- 
Maintenance 
Maintenance 
Strontium-90 
Fission Product Development Lab 
- 
Cell 10 
Maintenance - 
Chemical Technician 
Chemical Technician 
Chemical Tecbnician 
Strontium-90 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
Hot cells 
Maintenance 
3517 
Cesium-I 37 
Cerium-i 44 
Fission Product Development Lab 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
3517 
Hot cells 
Hot cells 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Hot cells 
Instrument Mechanic 
Strontium-90 
Cesium-I 37 
Cerium-144 
External radiation 
7900 
Chemical Operators 
Strontium-90 
Fission Product Development Lab 
3517 
3517 
Cell 10 
Strontium-90 
Fission Product Development Lab 
Cells and Glove Boxes 
Internal radiation 
High Rad. Level Examination Lab. 
3525 
Cells and Glove Boxes 
Plutonium 
High Rad. Level Examination Lab. 
3525 
3525 
Cells and Glove Boxes 
- 
Curium 
High Rad. Level Examination 
Hot Cells 
Plutonium 
Americium 
igh Rad. Level Chem. Develop. La 
4507 
Hot Cells 
igh Rad. Level Chem. Develop. La 
4507 
- 
Hot Cells 
Curium 
igh Rad. Level Chem. Develop. La 
4507 
Hot Cells 
Tramex 
igh Rad. Level Chem. Develop. La 
4507 
reactor 
HPs 
— 
neutron 
DSAR 
7710 
power 
low 
reactor 
HPs 
External radiation 
neutron 
A-2
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results
V 
Summary Report 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
1 
Scientists 
Scientists 
9211 
Biology Lab 
9211 
Biology Lab 
Biology Lab 
9211 
V 
Scientists- 
Biology Lab 
9211 
Scientists 
Biology Lab 
Rat Building' 
Rat Building' 
Biology Maintenance 
9208 
9208 
Scientists 
- 
- 
Biology Maintenance 
9208 
Scientists 
Biology Maintenance 
9208 
- 
Scientists 
Biology Maintenance 
9208 
Scientists 
Biology Maintenance 
) 
) 
) 
9210 
9210 
Scientists 
Scientists 
Radiation 
Rat Building' 
9210 
Scientists 
Red Dye 
Rat Building' 
9210 
V 
Radiation 
Biology Bldgs 
9211 
Scientists 
Lead 
PCBs 
Asbestos 
Radiation 
Red Dye 
Radiation 
Chemical Building 
9206 
Radiation 
Chemical Building 
9206 
V 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process 
R & D Mechanics 
Radiation 
velopment Lab and Offi 
9202 
Development 
R & D Mechanics 
Welding Fumes 
velopment Lab and Offi 
9202 
Development 
R & D Mechanics 
Radiation 
velopment Lab and Offi 
9203 
Development 
R & D Mechanics 
Welding Fumes 
velopment Lab and Offi 
9203 
9203 
Development 
R & D Mechanics 
Uranium 
velopment Lab and Offi 
Development 
Radiation 
Chemical Building 
9206 
Enriched Uranium 
Chemical Building 
9206 
V 
Uranium wI metal alloys 
Chemical Building 
9206 
Radiation 
Lead 
Biology Bldgs 
9210 
9210 
Scientists 
Rat Building' 
Scientists 
PCBs 
—— 
Asbestos 
Radiation 
Biology Bldgs 
9207 
- 
Scientists 
- 
Lead 
Biology Lab 
9207 
Scientists 
PCBs 
Biology Lab 
9207 
9207 
- 
Scientists 
— Asbestos 
Biology Lab 
Scientists 
Radiation 
Biology Lab 
9207 
Scientists 
Red Dye 
Biology Lab 
9207 
- Radiation 
Biology Bldgs 
9208 
- 
Scientists 
Lead 
PCBs 
Asbestos 
Radiation 
Red Dye 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Maintenance 
Chemical and Metallur 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
9212 
machining 
machining 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Maintenance 
- 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
- 
machining 
Machinists - 
U-238 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Machine Cleaners 
trimsol 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Maintenance 
trimsol 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Machine Cleaners 
Oilers 
U-238 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
methanol 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Maintenance 
) 
) 
methanol 
Chemical and Metallur 
machining 
Machine Cleaners 
Oilers 
Oilers 
Oilers 
methanol 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
trimsol 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Oilers 
U-238 
Tungsten 
Graphite 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Carbon Shop 
- 
methanol 
trimsol 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Machinists 
Tungsten 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Machine Cleaners 
HF 
HF 
Clieinieal andMetallur 
9212 
UF4 production 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
m Recovery and Processing 
Radiation 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
X-ray Vaults 
. 
Tungsten 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Machinists 
. 
Chemical 
Building Name 
I Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Tungsten 
Magnesium 
Magnesium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Maintenance 
Magnesium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Machinists 
Magnesium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
9212 
machining 
Machine Cleaners 
Cadmium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Cadium plating. 
Internal Radiation 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Floor Decontamination Chemical Operators 
Uranium 
Chemical and-Metallur 
9212 
Floor Decontamination Chemical Operators 
• 
U-238 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
machining 
Machinists. 
- 
Uranium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry 
U-238 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry 
Percolene 
Enriched Uranium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
M-Wing Rolling Mills 
- 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
M-Wing Rolling Mills 
. 
UF4 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
UF4 production 
UF4 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
m Recovery and Processing 
Radiation 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
X-ray Vaults 
) 
Summary Report 
UF4 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Room 1010 
Chemical Operators 
DAG 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry Casting 
Chemical Operators 
UF4 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Electricians 
freon 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Chemical Operators 
- 
Argon 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Chemical Operators 
Noise 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Pipefitters 
HF 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Pipefitters 
UF4 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Pipefitters 
Noise 
Chemical and Metallurj 
9212 
B and C wings 
Chemical Operators 
HF 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Chemical Operators 
UF4 
I Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Chemical Operators 
) 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Lithium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Room 1010 
Chemical Operators 
Lithium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Millwright 
Lithium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Electricians 
Nitric Acid 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Machinists 
Nitric Acid 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry Casting 
Chemical Operators 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Uranium Metal 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Chemical Operators 
Neutron Sources 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Chemical Operators 
Fuming Nitric Acid 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Millwright 
nitrogen Tetroxide 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Chemical Operators 
Sodium Hydroxide 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Millwright 
Fuming Nitnc Acid 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Electricians 
Sodium Hydroxide 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Electricians 
Fuming Nitric Acid 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Pipefitters 
Sodium Hydroxide 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Pipefitters 
Lithium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Pipefitters 
Noise 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Millwright 
HF 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Millwright 
UF4 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Millwright 
Fuming Nitric Acid 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Chemical Operators 
Sodium Hydroxide 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Chemical Operators 
Lithium 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Chemical Operators 
Noise 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Electricians 
. 
HE 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
B and C wings 
Electricians 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
freon 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Office Workers 
DAG 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Office Workers 
Argon 
Chemical andMetallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Office Workers 
Titanium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Machinists 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-VVingMachining 
Machinists 
Radiation 
Experimental Building 
9213 
Radiation 
Katies Kitchen 
9213 
Radiation Techs 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Rolling Mills 
Radiation 
Katies Kitchen 
9213 
Health Physicists 
Percolene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Rolling Mills 
. 
Aluminum 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Machinists 
DAG 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Security Guard 
Nitric Acid 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Office Workers - 
Depleted U 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Rolling Mills 
Stainless Steel 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-\Ning Machining 
Machinists 
freon 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Machinists 
DAG 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Machinists 
Nitric Acid 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Security Guard 
Uranium Metal 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Security Guard 
Uranium Metal 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Office Workers 
Chemical 
I 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Uranium Metal 
[ Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Machinists 
Neutron Sources 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Office Workers 
Argon 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, C-asting 
Security Guard 
Neutron Souràes 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Security Guard 
freon 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Security Guard 
- 
Argon 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Machinists 
Neutron Sources 
Chemical and Metallur 
9212 
Foundry, Casting 
Machinists 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-VVing Rolling Mills 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-VVing Machining 
Machinists 
Perchloroethylene 
"Third MIII" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Machinists 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Material handlers 
Perchioroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Material handlers 
ethylene glycol wI borax 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Material handlers 
. 
ethylene glycol wI borax 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Machinists 
. 
Summary Report 
lead 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Machinists 
. 
TCE 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Janitors 
Heat 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Machinists 
Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Janitors 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Office 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Materials Clerks 
TCE 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Materials Clerks 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Janitors 
Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Machinists 
Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Material Clerks 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Aluminum 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Maintenance 
Titanium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Maintenance 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
- 
Stainless Steel 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-VVing Machining 
Material handlers 
Aluminum 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Material handlers 
Titanium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Material handlers 
Internal Radiation 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
OWing Rolling Mill 
Machinists 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Machinists 
- 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Material handlers 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Maintenance 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Maintenance 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Office 
Perchloroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Office 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Machinists 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Machinists 
TCE 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Machinists 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Material Clerks 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
Janitors 
Perchloroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Maintenance 
ethylene glycol wI borax 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Maintenance 
Stainless Steel 
"Third Mill" 
9215 --- 
M-Wing Machining 
Maintenance 
ethylene glycol wI borax 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Office 
Stainless Steel 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Office 
Aluminum 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Office 
Titanium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Machining 
Office 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Supervisor 
U-238 
•"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing H.eat Treat Hydrof 
Machinists 
- 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Electrician 
Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215. 
Maintenance Area 
Electrician 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Pipefitters 
Internal Radiation 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Pipefitters 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Pipefitters 
Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Pipefitters 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Machinists 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Machinists 
Heat 
"Third Milr' 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Cleaners 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Cleaners 
Internal Radiation 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Cleaners 
lead 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Cleaners 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Cleaners 
Heat 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Supervisor 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
21o 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Supervisor 
Internal Radiation 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Supervisor 
lead 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Supervisor 
- 
Thorium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Machinists 
Perchloroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Machinists 
TCE 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Machinists 
Stainless Steel 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Machinists 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ingHeat Treat Hydrof 
Machinists 
PCBs 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Machinists 
. 
U-238 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
- 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Cleaners 
- 
Thorium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Cleaners 
Perchloroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Cleaners 
TCE 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Cleaners 
Stainless Steel 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Cleaners 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
[ 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Cleaners 
PCB5 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
ing Heat Treat Hydrof 
Cleaners 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Electrician 
Internal Radiation 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Electrician 
Summary Report 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Heat 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Machinists 
Lithium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Cleaners 
Lithium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Machinists 
Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Welder 
Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Machinists 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Welder 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Machinists 
Asbestos 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
CM 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
- 
. 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
OM 
Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
' 
Maintenance Area 
CM 
Asbestos'-' 
- "Third MU1 
9215' 
Maintenance Area 
Welder 
. 
'. 
Internal Radiation 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
' 
Maintenance Area 
Welder 
Perchioroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Oil Baths 
Mchinists 
- 
Freon 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Oil Baths 
Machinists 
- 
DAG 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Oil Baths 
Cleaners 
' 
Perchloroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
,0-Wing Oil Baths 
Cleaners 
Internal Radiation 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
Machinists 
Internal Radiation 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Maintenance Area 
OM 
Enriched Uranium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Blister Packing 
Material Clerks 
Sodium Hydroxide 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Cleaners 
Sodium Hydroxide 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Machinists 
Freon 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Blister Packing 
Material Clerks 
Etchant 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Blister Packing 
Material Clerks 
- 
Potassium Carbonate 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Machinists 
Potassium Carbonate 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Cleaners 
Heat 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Cleaners 
- 
' 
- 
Potassium Carbonate 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Supervisor 
Sodium Hydroxide 
' "Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Supervisor 
Lithium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Supervisor 
Heat 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Salt Baths 
Supervisor 
DAG 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Oil Baths 
Machinists 
U-238 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
3rd Mill 
Machinists 
Uranium wI metal alloys 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
3rd Mill 
, 
Machinists 
Noise 
, 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
3rd Mill 
Machinists 
• 
. 
Dykam 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Irridium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
. 
ICE 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Alcohol 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
: 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Titanium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Graphite 
[ 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
- 
Acetone 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
. 
Tungsten 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
• 
fiberglass 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
. 
Dykam Remover 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
- 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Freon 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Oil Baths 
Cleaners 
DAG 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Oil Baths 
Supervisor 
Perchloroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Oil Baths 
Supervisor 
Freon 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Oil Baths 
Supervisor 
lead 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Lead Baths 
Machinists 
Bismuth 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Lead Baths 
Machinists 
lead 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Lead Baths 
Cleaners 
Bisrnuth 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Lead Baths 
Cleaners 
lead 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing ....ead Baths 
Supervisor 
Bismuth 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Lead Baths 
Supervisor 
Black Oxide 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Machinists 
Black Oxide 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Cleaners 
Black Oxide 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Supervisor 
Plutonium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Machinists 
Plutonium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Cleaners 
Plutonium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
0-Wing Rolling Mill 
Supervisor 
Beryllium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing Inspection 
U-238 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing 
Perchloroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing 
TCE 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
M-Wing 
U-235 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
W-Wing 
Thorium 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Perchioroethylene 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
Freon 
"Third Mill" 
9215 
. 
Summary Report 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Cleaners- 
Lead 
Biology Lab 
9224 
Scientists 
U-238 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9996 
crucible machining 
Machinists 
PCBs 
Biology Lab 
9220 
Scientists 
PCBs 
Biology Lab 
9224 
Scientists 
mercury 
Old Pump Shop 
9808 
- 
Mercury Pumps 
OM 
- 
Uranium 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9996 
crucible machining 
Machinists 
Red Dye 
Biology Lab 
9220 
Scientists 
Red Dye 
Biology Lab 
9224 
Scientists 
Red Dye 
Old Steam Plant 
9769 
Scientists 
Beryllium 
Office 
9766 
West End 
Thorium 
Office 
9766 
West End 
Scientists 
Lead 
Old Steam Plant 
I 
9769 
PCBs 
Old Steam Plant 
9769 
Scientists 
Asbestos 
Old Steam Plant 
9769 
Scientists 
Radiation 
Old Steam Plant 
9769 
Scientists 
Radiation 
Biology Lab 
9220 
Scientists 
Asbestos 
Biology Lab 
9224 
Scientists 
Radiation 
Biology Lab 
9224 
Scientists 
. 
Asbestos 
Biology Lab 
9220 
Scientists 
Depleted U 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Material handlers 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number I 
Process Area 
Job 
Depleted U 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Machinists 
Depleted U 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Cleaners 
Black Oxide 
Foundry 
9998 
Foundry 
Stainless Steel 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Machinists 
Depleted U 
j 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Supervisor 
Stainless Steel 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Supervisor 
Stainless Steel 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Material handlers 
Carbon Tetrachloride 
"Third MIII" 
9215 
T 
Lead 
Biology Lab 
9220 
Scientists 
Uranium wI metal alloys 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Supervisor 
Stainless Steel 
Uranium wI metal alloys 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Cleaners 
Uranium WI metal alloys 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
Material handlers 
Uraniumw/ metal alloys 
Foundry 
9998 
H2 Machine Shop 
. 
. 
- 
Colex 
Welder 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Colex 
- 
Welder 
- 
- 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Colex 
Electrician 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Colex 
Electrician 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Elex 
Electrician 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Elex 
Electrician 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Colex 
pipefitter 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Colex 
pipefitter 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Elex 
pipefitter 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Elex 
pipefitter 
- 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
-Colex 
OM 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Colex 
OM 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201 -2 
Elex 
OM 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Elex 
OM 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
Chemical Operators 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
Chemical Operators I 
- 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Enriched Uranium 
Alpha -1 
j 
9201-1 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
Magnetic Fields 
Alpha -1 
9201-1 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
Graphite 
Alpha -1 
9201-1 
Carbon Shop 
Enriched Uranium 
Alpha -1 
9201-2 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
Magnetic Fields 
Alpha -1 
9201-2 
Calutron - 
Chemical Operators 
Radiation 
Alpha-2 
9201-2 
Cyclotron 
mercury 
Alpha-2 
9201-2 
COLEX 
HF 
alpha-2 
9201-2 
COLEX-- 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201 -2 
Colex 
Chemical Operators 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Colex 
Chemical Operators 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Elex 
Chemical Operators 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Elex 
Chemical Operators 
mercury 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
EJex 
Welder 
alcohol 
Alpha 2 
9201-2 
Elex 
Welder 
Enriched Uranium 
Alpha -3 
- 
9201-3 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
Magnetic Fields 
Alpha -3 
9201-3 
Calutron 
-Chemical Operators 
Enriched Uranium 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
Magnetic Fields 
} 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
- - 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
- 
OM 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
OM 
- 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Colex 
Chemical Operators 
alcohol 
Alpha-5 
920 1-5 
Colex 
Chemical Operators 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Elex 
Chemical Operators 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
Chemical Operators 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
Chemical Operators 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
Electrician 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
Electrician 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
Electrician 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
Electrician 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
pipefitter 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
920i4 
Colex 
pipefitter 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
pipefitter 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
pipefitter 
- 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
- 
Elex 
OM 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
- 
OM 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
Welder 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Colex 
Welder 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
Welder 
alcohol 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Elex 
Welder 
mercury 
Alpha-4 
9201-4 
Chemical Operators 
Beryllium Oxide 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
- 
Bulter Bldg 
Machinists 
Thorium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Bulter Bldg 
Machinists 
Beryllium Oxide 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Bulter Bldg 
Machinists 
- 
Thorium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Bulter Bldg 
Machinists 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Seperation Bldg 
Lithium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
- 
Seperation Bldg 
mercury 
I 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Seperation Bldg 
Lithium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Seperation Bldg 
Enriched Uranium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
Magnetic Fields 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
Cyanide 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Electroplating 
NaK 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
2nd floor press 
- 
— 
Electrician 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
9201-5 
9201-5 
Colex 
Elex 
Electrician 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
• 
Chemical Operators 
• 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
Maintenance 
TCE 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
Butler Building 
Inspector 
Freon 
Alpha-S 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
Inspector 
. 
alcohol 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Elex 
Welder 
alcohol 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Elex 
OM 
alcohol 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Colex 
Welder 
) 
: 
) 
) 
alcohol 
alcohol 
- Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Elex 
Electrician 
alcohol 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Colex 
OM 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Elex 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Colex 
Welder 
mercury 
Alpha-S 
9201-5 
Elex 
Welder 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Chemical Operators 
Uranium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Chemical Operators 
Thorium 
NaK 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Operators 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
Alpha-5 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
. 
Colex 
pipefitter 
alcohol 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Coléx 
pipefitter 
. 
mercury 
Alpha5 
9201-5 
Elex 
pipefitter 
alcohol 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Elex 
pipefitter 
OM 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Colex 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
Inspector 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
Machinists 
. 
Beryllium 
mercury 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Colex 
Electrician 
Beryllium 
Mineral Oil 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
Butler Building 
Machinists 
• 
Mineral Oil 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
Butler Building 
• 
Beryllium 
Alpha-S 
9201 -5 
Butler Building 
Electriciats 
Mineral Oil 
. 
. Alpha-S 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
. 
• 
Mineral Oil 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Operators 
Chemical 
Heat 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
- 
Operators 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
• 
alcohol 
j 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Elex 
Chemical Operators 
• 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
Butler Building 
Pipefitters 
- 
Perchioroethylene 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
Inspector 
Summary Feport 
gold 
Alpha-5 
9201-5E 
Machinists 
, 
Noise 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Hydraulics 
Electricians 
Noise 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Hydraulics 
Pipéfitters 
- 
U-238 
Alpha-5 
9201-SE 
Foreman 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
uranium 
j 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
2nd floor 
Machinists 
Platinum 
Alpha-S 
9201-SE 
Machinists 
Lead 
Alpha-S 
9201-5E 
Machinists 
- 
gold 
Alpha-5 
9201-5E 
Foreman 
Platinum 
Alpha-5 
9201-SE 
. 
Foreman 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
2nd floor 
Machinists 
asbestos 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
2nd floor 
Machinists 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
2nd floor 
Machinists 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
3rd floor 
Maintenance 
uranium 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
3rd floor 
Maintenance 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
Beryllium Spray Area 
Electroplaters 
U-238 
Alpha-5 
9201-5E 
Machinists 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
2nd floor 
Inspector 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
2nd flor 
Chemical Operators 
Beryllium 
Alpha-S 
9201-5 
2nd floor 
- 
- 
Uranium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
3rd floor 
Machinists 
Thorium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5E 
Machinists 
Plutonium 
Alpha-5 
9201-SE 
Machinists 
- 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Mineral Oil 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
Pipefitters 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
Butler Building 
Machine Cleaners 
Mineral Oil 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
Machine Cleaners 
Beryllium 
Alpha-S 
9201-5 
3rd floor 
Machinists 
silver solder 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
3rd floor 
Machinists 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Butler Building 
Engineers 
Mineral Oil 
Alpha-5 
9201 -5 
Butler Building 
Engineers 
Carbon Foam 
Alpha-S 
9201 -5 
Foam Shop 
Machinists. 
Noise 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Utility Area 
Maintenance 
Noise 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Utility Area 
Electricians 
Noise 
Alpha-5 
9201-5 
Utility Area 
Pipefitters 
Noise 
Alpha-S 
201-5 
Hydraulics 
Maintenance 
- 
Steel 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
machining 
Machinists 
U-238 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
machining 
Machinists 
- 
) 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
cyanide 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Electroplaters 
Beryllium 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Electroplaters 
HEU 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Elctropiaieis 
Chemical 
I 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Lead 
Alpha-5 
9201-5E 
. 
Foreman 
Thorium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5E 
Foreman 
Plutonium 
Alpha-5. 
9201-5E 
Foreman 
. 
Binary 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
machining 
Machinists 
Aluminum 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
machining 
Machinists 
- 
Perchloroethylene 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
machining- 
Machinists 
freon 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
machining 
Machinists 
- 
cyanide 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
caustics 
Plate Shop 
9201 -5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Copper 
Plate Shop 
9201 -5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Nickel 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
. 
Chrome 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Chromium Oxide 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Gold 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
P!ate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Silver 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Cadmium 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
• 
HEU 
Plate Shop 
920 1-5N 
Security Guard 
- 
• 
Beryllium 
Alpha-5 
9201-5E 
lnspection 
Inspector 
U-238 
Alpha-5 
9201-5E 
Uranium Inspection 
Inspector 
: 
Aqua Regia 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Potassium Cyanide 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Perchloroethylene 
Plate Shop 
9201-5N 
Plate Shop 
Electroplaters 
Uranium wI metal alloys Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Machinists 
Aluminum 
Manufacturing/lndustria 
9201-5W 
Machinists 
Internal Radiation 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Machinists 
Uranium wI metal alloys Manufacturirig/lndustria 
9201 -5W 
Maintenance 
Aluminum 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Maintenance 
Internal Radiation 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Maintenance 
Uranium w/ metal alloys Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Electricians 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
OM 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
Welder 
Arsenic 
j 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Machine Shop 
Machinist 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
Electrician 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
Electrician 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
pipefitter 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
pipefitter 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
pipefitter 
.________ 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
pipefitter 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
OM 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
OM 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
OM 
- 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
Welder 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
Welder 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
Welder 
Lithium Hydride 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Machine Shop 
Machinist 
- 
Lithium Deutiride 
] 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Machine Shop 
Machinist - 
trimsol 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Machine Cleaning 
Machine Cleaners 
kerosene 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Machine Cleaning 
Machine Cleaners 
Nitric Acid 
Beta-2 
9204-2 
Salt bath area 
Chemical Operators 
Lithium Deutiride 
Beta-2 
9204-2 
Salt bath area 
Chemical Operators 
Lithium Salt 
Beta-2 
9204-2 
Salt bath area 
Chemical Operators 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
Chemical Operators 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
Chemical Operators 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
Chemical Operators 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Elex 
Chemical Operators 
mercury 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
Electrician 
alcohol 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Colex 
Electrician 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
j 
Job 
Aluminum 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-SW 
Electricians 
Internal Radiation 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201 -5W 
Electricians 
alcohol 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Machine Cleaning 
Machine Cleaners 
acetone 
- 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201-5W 
Machine Cleaning 
Machine Cleaners 
freon 
Manufacturing/Industria 
9201 -5W 
Machine Cleaning 
Machjne Cleaners 
Perchloroethylene 
Manufacturing/lndustria 
9201-5W 
Machine Cleaning 
Machine Cleaners 
• 
. 
- 
- 
Silver 
Beta-4 
9204-4 
- 
- 
. 
Uranium 
Beta-4 
9204-4 
Beryllium 
Beta-4 
9204-4 
Coal Dust 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Steam Plant Operators 
Fly Ash 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Steam Plant Operators 
Sulfuric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Steam Plant Operators 
Phosphates 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Steam Plant Operators 
Coal Dust 
Steam Plant 
9401 -2 
Foreman 
t 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
-________ 
PCBs 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Chemical Operators 
Lithium 
Beta 2 
9204-2 
Fissile Material 
Beta 2 
9204-2E 
Assembly 
Enriched Uranium 
Beta-3 
9204-3 
Calutron 
Chemical Operators 
Radiation 
Beta-3 
9204-3 
Cyclotron 
Plutonium 
Beta-3 
9204-3 
Calutron 
U-238 
Beta-4 
92044 
Press Area 
U-238 
Beta-4 
- 
9204-4 
Machining 
Acid 
Beta-4 
9204-4 
Acid Vats 
Lead 
Beta-4 
9204-4 
. 
— 
Stainless Steel 
Beta-4 
9204-4 
Boric acid 
Beta-4 
9204-4 
- 
Fissile Material 
Beta-4 
9204-4 
Disassembly 
Nitric Acid 
Beta-4 Plate Shop 
9204-4 
Electroplaters 
Sulfuric Acid 
Beta-4 Plate Shop 
9204-4 
Electroplàters 
Sodium Hydroxide 
Beta-4 Plate Shop 
9204-4 
Electroplaters 
Nickel Sulfamate 
Beta-4 Plate Shop 
9204-4 
Electroplaters 
Cadmium 
Beta-4 Plate Shop 
9204-4 
Electroplaters 
Copper 
Beta-4 Plate Shop 
9204-4 
Electroplaters 
Natural U 
P-wing 
9212 Complex 
Rolling Mills 
Enriched Uranium 
0-wing 
9212 Complex 
Rolling Mills 
Cyanide 
Plate Shop 
9401 -2 
Plating shop 
Nickel 
Plate Shop 
9401-2 
Plating shop 
Copper 
Plate Shop 
9401-2 
Plating shop 
Gold 
Plate Shop 
9401-2 
Plating shop 
. 
Chromium 
Plate Shop 
9401-2 
Plating shop 
- 
) 
1) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Fly Ash 
Steam Plant 
j 
9401 -2 
. 
OM 
Dyes 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
OM 
Acids 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
. 
Crane and Hoist 
- 
- - 
Heat 
Steam Plant 
9401 -2 
Crane and Hoist 
Chromium 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Crane and Hoist 
- 
- 
Foreman 
Sulfuric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Foreman 
Phosphates 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Foreman 
Coal Dust - 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Maintenance 
Fly Ash 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
- 
Maintenance 
Sulfuric Acid 
[ 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Maintenance 
Phosphates 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Maintenance 
Coal Dust 
Steam Plant -- 
9401-2 
Janitor 
Fly Ash 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Janitor 
Sulfuric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Janitor 
Phosphates 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Janitor 
Acids 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electroplaters 
Heat 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electroplaters 
Chromium 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electroplaters 
Dyes 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electroplaters 
Acids 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Supervisor 
Heat 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Supervisor 
Chromium 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Supervisor 
Dyes 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Supervisor 
Acids 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electricians 
Heat 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electricians 
Chromium 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electricians 
Dyes 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electricians 
— 
Acids 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Pipefltters 
Heat 
Steam Plant 
9401 -2 
Pipefitters 
Chromium 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Pipefitters 
Dyes 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Pipefitters 
Acids 
Steam Plant 
9401 -2 
OM 
Heat 
Steam Plant - 
9401-2 
OM 
Chromium 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Summary Report 
) 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
cyanide 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electroplaters 
cyanide 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Supervisor 
cyanide 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electricians 
cyanide 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Pipefitters 
cyanide 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
OM 
cyanide 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Crane and Hoist 
allodine 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electroplaters 
allodine 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
. 
Supervisor 
allodine 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electricians 
allodine 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Pipefitters 
. 
allodine 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
OM 
allodine 
Steam Plant 
9401 -2 
Crane and Hoist 
Lead 
Chicken House 
9743-2 
Scientists 
PCBs 
Chicken House 
9743-2 
Scientists 
Asbestos 
Chicken House 
9743-2 
Scientists 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
I.________ 
Dyes 
Steam Plant 
940 1-2 
Crane and Hoist 
HF 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electroplaters 
Nitric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electroplaters 
Hydrochloric Acid 
Steam Plant 
940 1-2 
Electroplaters 
HF 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Supervisor 
Nitric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Supervisor 
Hydrochloric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Supervisor 
HF 
•team Plant 
9401-2 
. 
Electricians 
Nitric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electricians 
- 
Hydrochloric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Electricians 
- 
HF 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Pipefitters 
Nitric Acid 
Steam Plant 
940 1-2 
Pipefitters 
Hydrochloric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Pipefitters 
HF 
' 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
OM 
Nitric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
OM 
Hydrochloric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
OM 
HF 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Crane .and Hoist 
Nitric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Crane and Hoist 
Hydrochloric Acid 
Steam Plant 
9401-2 
Crane and Hoist 
Y-12 Risk Mapping Results 
Summary Report 
• 
Green House. 
. 
" 
• 
Scientists' -"-' 
PCBs 
Green House 
' 
Scientists 
Asbestos 
Green House 
, 
Scientists 
Radiation 
Green House 
Scientists 
Red bye 
Green House 
• 
Scientists 
Chemical 
Building Name 
Building Number 
Process Area 
Job 
Radiation 
Chicken House 
9743-2 
- 
Scientists 
Red Dye 
Chicken House 
9743-2 
Scientists 
Lead 
Chiller Building 
9767 
Scientists 
PCBs 
Chiller Building 
9767 
Scientists 
- 
Asbestos 
Chiller Building 
9767 
- 
Scientists' 
Radiation 
- Chiller Building 
9767 
Scientists 
Red Dye 
Chiller Building 
9767 
Scientists 
• 
• 
• Ledd 
Appendix B
B-i
Y-12 External Dose
Y-12 Penetrating Dose (1950-1 988) >500 mrem by Department
Dept
Number >500 rnrem
Dept
Number >500 mrem
2000
18
Grand Total
695
2001
5
2702
100
2003
2
•
2617
90
2O14
13
2619
81
2015
6
2018
67
2018
67
2044
24
2035
2
2703
24
2038.
3
2701
21
2044
24.
.
2000
18
2055
4
2638
18
2057
1
2640
14
2066
1
2014
13
2070
2
2601
9
2077
6
•
2637
9
2091
4
2644
9
2093
2
2618
8
2098
1
2231
7
2106
1
2722
7
2107
2
•
2015
6
2108
5
2077
6
2133
,1
2233
6
2157
2
2375
6
2158
4
2624
6
2162
1
2705
6
2164.
1
2001
5
2186
1
2108
5
2188
1
2259
5
2200
3
2635
5
2231
7
2720
5
2233 .
6
2736
5
2239
1
2791
5
2259
5
2055
.
4
.
2301
4
2091
4
23.15
.2
2158
4
2345
2
2301
4
2360
1
2387
2365
1
2726
4
.2371
1
7410
4
2373
.
2
.
2038
3
2375
6
2200
3
2376
1
2388
.
3
2377
1
2654
3
2382
1
2664
3
2387
4
2793
3
2388
3
.
2003
.
2
2465
1
.
2035
2
2601
9
2070
2
2604
1
2093
2
2610
2
2107
2
2616
2
2157
2
2617
90
2315
2
6—l
Y-12 Penetrating Dose (1950-1988) >5Q0 mrem by Department
Dept
Number >500 mrem
Dept
Number >500 mrem
2618
8
2345
2
2619
81
.________
2373
2
2624
6
,
61O
2
2625
'1
'
•
.2616'
•2
2628
2
2628
2
2629
.1
.
•
2636
,
2"
2635
5
.
2695
2
2636
•
2
______
2718
.2
2637
9
2742
2
2638
18
2057
1
2640
14
•
2066
1
2644
9
.
'
.
2098
1
2650
1
2106
, I
2654
3
.
2133
'
I
2664
,
3
.
.
'
2162
.
. i
2691
1
'
2164
1
2695
2
•
2186
1
2699
1
2188
1
2700
1
.
2239
1
2701
21
2360
1
2702
100
'
2365
1.
2703
24
2371
1
.2705
6
2376 '
I
2718'
2
2377
'
I
2720
'
5
.
2382
1
2722
7
2465
1
2726
4
'
2604
1
2736
5
2625
1
2742
2
2629
.
I
2774
1 .
,
2650
1
2776
1
2691
1
2791
,5
.
2699
1
2793
3
2700
1
7169
1
'
2774
1
7410
4
'
2776
1
(blank)
7169
1
rand Iota
695
(blank)
al-a
Y-12 Skin Dose (1950-1988) >500mrem by Department
Dept
Number >500 mrem
Dept
Number >500 mrem
2000
187
Grand Total
22601
2001
61
•
2703
3448
2002
24
.
2618
2106
2003
79
2702
2012
2009
1
2792
1308
2014
71
v
2638
1069
2015
138
.
2701
.
1062
2018
292
2619
1060
2035
.
2
.
.
2640
1025
2037
3
2720
813
2038
9
2375
566
2041
•
2793
544
2043
1
2617
525
2044
132
2637
470.
2046
1
.
2233
'461
2055
229
2722
417
2057
2
2387
368
2060
16
.
2736
340
2063
1
2018
292
2064
15
2093
278
2065
2
2665
257
2066
2
.
2624
245
2068
.
3
2644
238
2069
4
2055
229
2070
24
'
2616
202
2071
4
2000
187
2077
IAI_______
2231
171
2085
1
2791
151
2089
1
2259
150
2090
15
2015
138
2091
19
.
'
2044
132
2093
_278
2705
.122
2094
1
2108
115
2098
1
'
2077
111
2106
1
2200
111
2107
4
2726
106
2108
115
2625
96
2128
35
2776
92
2133
1
2301
83
2136
1 .
2601
83
2137
.
2003
79
2141
'
4
2365
78
2142
8
2695
75
2143
1
2014
71
2145
1
'
2773
71
2151
•
1
2001
61
2157
2
2158
60
2158
60
2162
40
2159
13
2664
37
2160
6
2128
35
2162 .
40
2774
34
Y-12 Skin Dose (1 950-1988) >500rnrem by Department
•
Dept
Number >500 mrem
Dept
Number.>500. mrem
2164
4
'
2388
.
31
2165
1
.
2654
30
2183
1
2713
30
2186
1
2252
.
27
2188
2
2002
24
2200
1,11
2070
24
2204
3
.
2376
'
24
2231
• 171
2389
24.
2233
461
.
2742
22
2235
3
2707
21
2239
6
'
2600
2Q
2252
27
2628
20
2257
•
13
2689
20
2259
150
•
2091 •
19
2260
2
2344
18
2282
5
•
2060 '
1
2300
1
'
83
•
2064
15
2301
2090
15
2302
2 •
—
•
2345
14
2303
6
2159
13
2304
1
.
2257
• 13
2315
6
2636
13
2320
7
2799 '.
13
2342 '
3
2687
11
.2343
3
•
2694
10'
2344
18
2038
9
2345 .
14
2790
9
2346
1
•
2142
8
2347
1
2320
7
2351
•
2.
•
3.
2377
7
2356
•
3
2602
7
2360
.
2635
7
2365
78
•
2700
7
2366
2
2723
7
2371
6
'
'
'
7410
7
2373
4
• 2160'
6
2375
566
2239
6
2376
•
.
24
•
2303
.
2377
7
2315
6
2378
.
•
4
2371
6'
2380
1
2282
5
2382
1
2410
5
2386
1
2738
5
2387
368
2069
4
2388
31
2071
4
2389
24
•
2107
4
2390
1
2141
4
2410
5
.
2164
•
4
2439
1
2373
4
2465
1
2378
4
2600
20
2605
4
6L—'4
Y-12 Skin Dose (1950-1988) >500mrem by Department
Dept
Number >500 mrem
Dept
Number >500 mrem
2601
83
2629
4
2602
7
.
685
4
2603
1
•
2691
.
4
2604
1
2037
3
2605
4
2068
3
2606
1.
2204
3
2610
3
.
2235
3
2616
202
.
2342
3
2617
525
2343
3
2618
2106
2351
3
2619
1060
2356
3,
2624
245
2610
3
2625
96.
.
2633
3
2628
20
2704
3
2629
.
4
.
2712
3
2630
1
2714
3
2633
3
•
2739
3
2635
7
2035
2
2636
13
•.
2057
2
2637
470
2065
2
2638
1069
2066
2
2640
1025
2157
2
2643
2
238 —
.
2188
2
2644
2260
2
2646
2
.
2302
2
2648
2
2360
2
2649
1
2366
2
2650
2
•
2643
2
2652
2
2646
2
2654
30
2648
2
2664
37
2650
2
2665
257
2
.
2652
2
2668
.
2668
2
2682
2
2682
2
2685
4
.
•
2690
2
2687
11
2718
2
2689
20
7161
2
2690
2
.7169
2
2691
4
2009
1
2692
1.
2041
1
2694
10
2043
1
2695
75
2046
1
2697
1
2063
1
2699
2085
1
2700
7
.
2089
1
2701
1062
2094
1
2702
2012
2098
1
2703
3448
2106
1
2704
3
••
2133
1
2705
122
2136
1
2707
21
2137
1
131-5
Y-12 Skin Dose (1950-1 988) >500mrem by Department
Dept
Number >500 mrem
Dept
Number >500 mrem
2711
1
2143
1
2712
3
I •
.
2145
1
2713
30
2151
1
2714
3
2165
1
2718
2
2183
1
2720
813
2186
1
2722
417
2300
2723
7
.
2304
2724.
1
2346
2726
106
2347
2732
1
2380
2736
340
2382
2738
5
.
2386
1
2739
3
2390
1
2742
22
2439
.
I________
2760
1
2465
1
2773
71
2603
.
2774
34
2604
1
2776
92
2606
1
2790
9
2630
.1
2791
151
2649
1
2792
1308
2692
1
2793
. 544
2697
1
2799.
13
2699
1
7161
2
2711
1
7169
2
.
2724
1
7410
7.
.
2732
1
I
2760
1
(blank)
.
.
I
3rand Tota
.
22601
.
(blank)
1 
2 
2 
. 
1 
6 
1 
Y12 Neutron Dose. (1950-1980) (Rounded dose in mrem) vs. Dept. 
2303 ) 
3 
21 20 
U 8 7 6 4 
122 
4 
2345 
. 
Count of neutron_round neutron_round 
dept 
<10 
I 
101201 30140 50'60 
70180 901100 200 300 400 50016001700 900 GrandTotal 
2000 
1 
1 
4 
1 
7 
2001 
. 
I 
I 
. 
2 
2003 
1 
1 
. 
2 
2018 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
. . 
. 
.9 
2044 
2 
. 
1 
, 
. 
•3 
2070 
•1 
2 
. 
2077 
4 
5 
3 2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 
2091 
1 
. 
1 
2108 
7 6 4 5 2 2 
3 
1 
4 
2 
2 
1 
- 
- 
39 
2158 
4 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
.. 
. 
12 
2159 
1 
3 5 8 2 5 3 
1 
2 
1 
5 
2 
8 
2 
1 
1 
50 
2160 
2 
5 
2 
2 
3 
3 
1 
18 
2231 
2 
2 8 5 
4 
21 
2260 
1 
. - 
I 
. 
I 
I 
2 
2616 
1 
1 
- 
4 
4 
1 
11 
2617 
6 
11 
7 
6 
2 
- 
. 
32 
2618 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
- 
2685 
1 
- 
1 
2687 
1 
2 2 
. 
5 
2701 
1 
1 
2703 
1 
• 
I 
2791 
3 
. 
.__3 
(blank) 
5 
41 
21 
1 
1 
Grand Total 
17 
52 51 39127144 16 141 12 10 31 22 28 
376 
B-2
Y-12 Urinalysis Data
$
Y-12.Urinalysis Results vs. Department (based on greatest 5% of sample results)
Dept
Number of Samples
Dept
Number of Samples
0
1
Grand TQta!
15508
2001
83
•.
2617
5967
2003
20
2619
1441
2006
1
•
2618
1271
2014
244
.
2158
87
2015
216.
.
543
2018
.
77
2776
535
2037
•
5
.
5001
522
2038
13
—
.
2638
509
2044
7
.
2687
468
2055
20
2793
348,
2065
3
22$0
280
2077
137
2791
.276
2108
21
.
2014
244
2128
19
•
2015
216
2158
.897
2301
158
2161
2
2077
137
2162
1
2702
122
2204
5
.
2703
1 13
2230
280
2792
97
2231
72
. 2616
94
2233
70
2260
89
• 2257
78
.
.
• 2001
83
• 2259
25
2257
78
.2260
—
89
•
2018
77
2262
1
2718
76
2301
158.
2231
•
72
2342
.
15
2233
70
2343
31
2701
57.
2344
42
.
2720
53
2345
6
2665
47
2346
16
2692
43
2347
2
.
2344
42
2371
•
2
•
2640
33
2373
1
•
2343
31
2375
5
.
2628
31
2377
•
5
.
2774
30
2378
.
4
.2648
29
2379
12 .
2259
25
2382
.
1
2108
21
2600 .
4
2003
20
2616
•
94
2055
20
2617
5967
2128
19
2618
•
1271
2346
16
2619
1441
.
2342
15
2625
.
2
.
2Q38
13
2628
31
•
2379
12
2633
6
.
2646
12
2638
509
.
,
2647
12
2640
33
.
2736
.
12
2644
6
2695
9
Y-12 Urinalysis Results'vs. Department (based on greatest 5% of sample resufts)
I I
Dept
Number ofSamples
Dept•
Number of Samples
2646
12
4300
'8
2647
12
2044
7
2648
29
•
2742
7
2654
4
2799
7
2664
1
2345
6
2665
47
2633
6
266&
'2
.
2644
6
2687
468
•
2689
6
2689
6
2037
5
2690
1
•
2204
5
2692
43
2375
5
2694
2
2377
5
2695
'9
2705
5
2701
57
•2378
4
2702
122,
2600
'4
2703
113
2654
4
2705
5
2065
3
2713
3
2713
3
2718
76
2722
3
2720
53
2794
3
2722
.3
2161
2
2736
12 :
2347
2
2742
7
2371
2
2774
30
2625
2
2776
535
.
2668
'2
2791
276
.
2694
2
2792
97
0
1
2793
348
2006
1
2794
3
2162
1
2799
7
2262
1
4300
8
.
2373
1
5001
522
2382
1
9990
1
2664'
1
543
•
2690
1
(blank)
9990
1
randTota
15508
(blank)
.
B-3
X-1O External Dose
I,
X-1 0 Penetrating Dose >500 mrem by, Department Number
Dept
Number> 5O0 nirem
Dept
Number> 500 mrem
.
9
Grand Total
9247
3A
20
3X
6577
3C
581
H
3,C
581
3D
3
3650H
389
3X
6577
3363W
156
3001
1
3370W
142
3001H
2
3078H
129
3003M
I
.
3650W
95
3003W
2
3370M
85
3016H
38
3674H
63
3016W
3
3360W
57
3060M
1
3193M
56
3062H
3
3390W
46
3062M
I
3193W
41
3063
2
.
3079H
39
3063H
15
3369W
39
3063M
5
3016H
38
3075H
3
4650
35
3077
1
3650M
33
3077H
30
4460.
31
3078
2
3077H
30
3078H
129
3080H
28
3078M
13
4362
26
3079H
39
3470W
23
3079M
4
3490M
23
3079W
2
3632M
23
3080
2
3320M
21
3080H
28
•
3410M
21
3080M
6
3.A
20
3081H
2
3390M
9
3089M
1
3632H
18
3193
2
3639H
16
3193M
56
3063H
15
3193W
41
3410W
15
3194W
3
'
3363M
14
3234M
2
—
11
3078M
13
3234W
3650
12
3320M
21
3674W
12
3320W
3
—
4
3234W
11
3325
4360
11
3325H
2
3360H
10
3325M
3
3490W
10
3341
1
3639M
10
3341M
8
.
9
3345
1
3341M
8
3360H
10
3369M
8
3360W
57
3602
8
3361M
I
3614M
8
3361W
2
3080M
6
3363M
14
3369H
6
3363W
156
3405M
6
X-10 Penetrating Dose >500 mrem by Department Number
Dept
Number >.500 mrem
Dept
Number> 500 mrem
3369H
6
3420M
6
3369M
8
•
3675W
6
3369W
39
3063M
5
3370
5
3370
5
3370M
85
• S
•
.
3675
5
3370W
142
.
3079M
4
3380M
I
.
3325
4
3390
3
3435W
4
3390M
19
3608
4
3390W.
46
3674M
4
3405
1
3D
3
3405M
6
.
3016W
3
3410M
21
3062H
.
3
3410W
15
3075H
3
3420M
6
.
I
31 94W
3
3420W
. . 3320W
3
3430M
1
.
3325M
. 3
3430W
.
1
3390
3
3435
2
3490
.
3
3435W
4
3604
3
3470W
23
3606M
. 3
3490
3
3614W
3
3490M
.
23
3674
.
3
3490W
.
10
4193
3
3602
8
4435
3
3602H
2
.
3001H .
2.
3602M
1
3003W
2
3602W
2
3063
2
3604
3
3078
2
3606
2
3079W
2
3606M
3
3080
2.
3608
4
3081H
.
2
3608M
1
193
2
3614M
8
.
3234M
2
3614W
3
.
3325H
2
3632
2 .
.
3361W
2
3632H
18.
3435
. 2
3632M
23
3602H
2
3639H
16
3602W
2
3639M
10
3606
2
3642H
2
3632
2
3642M
..
2
3642H
2
3650
12
—
3642M
2
3650H
389
4435M
2
3650M
33
..
4435W
2
3650W
95
.
4455
2
3674
3
3001
1
3674H
63
.
3003M
3674M
4
3060M
3674W
12
3062M
.
I________
3675
.
5
3077
1
cL
X-10 Penetrating Dose >500 mrem by, Department Number
Dept
Number> 500 mrem
Dept•
Number> 500 mrern
3675M
1,
3089M
3675W
6
.3341
1
3743H
I
,
3345
1
4193
3
'
3361M
4360
11
'.
3380M
, I
4362
26
3405
1
4390W
1
3420W
1
4435
•
3
,
3430M
4435M
2
3430W
1
4435W
.2
3602M
4455
2
3608M
4460
31
.
'
3675M
4650
35.
3743H
4650M
—
I
4390W
1
8410
,
I
.
4650M
(blank)
.
8410
,
I
3rand Tota
9247
'
,
(blank)
63-'4
X-10 Skin Dose> 500 mrem by Department Number
Dept
Number >500 mrem
Dept
Number >500 mrem
3001
23
Grand Total
184Q0
3003
2
3X
11994
3016
40
3650H
1188
3061
17
3C
621
3063
23
• •
•
3078H
372
3073
1
3370W
260
3075
1
•
3363W
214
3077
1
3390W
209
3078
30
•
3193M
205
3079
25
3602
170
3080
3
3079H
157
3081
4
3370M
155
3091
4
3650W
140
3193
37
3390M
130
3194
1
3016H
129
3234
.
1
3650M
124
3236
1
3360W
110
3325
42
3632H
.109
3341
1
3193W
108
3345
1
3674H
106
3370
16
3077H
98
3390
32
4650
71
3405
1
3063H
70
3410
2
1
3369W
61
3420
3639H'
60
3435
3
.
3080H
55
3470
4
.
3470W
55
3475
2
4362
52
3490
7
4460
46
3602
170
3632M
43
3604
18
3325
42
3606
22
3410M
41
3608
7
3016
40
3632
.
2
.
3320M
40
3639
1
3490M
38
3650
15
3193
37
•3674
9
3390
32
3675
6
3078
30
4193
.
5
3420M
30
4360
27
3363M
28
4362
52
4360
27
4390
2
3410W
27
4430
1
3079
25
4435
17
3062H
24
4455
11
3001
23
4460
46
.
..
3063
23
4650
71
3614M
23
8410
1
3606
22
30168
.
2
.
14
3078M
3639M
22
21
c3-5
X-10 Skin Dose> 500 mrem by Department Number
Dept
Number >500 mrem
Dept
Number >500 mrem
3D
4,
3430M
20
3 N
I
•.
3490W
20
3X
11994
3674W
20
3001H
2
3604
.
18
3003M
3
3061
1,7
3003W
5•
..
4435
17
3016H
129
3081H
•
17
3016M
I
•
3234W
17
3016W
8
3369M
17
3032H
7
3602H
•
17
3060M
2
3370
16
3060W
1
3075H
16
3062H
24.
3650
.1
3062M
1
.
14
3063H
70
3079W
14
3063M
9
..
3360H
14
3075H
16
3325H
13
3075M
3
3341M
13
3075W
.1
3369H
13
3077H
98
3642H
12
3078H
372
3675W
12
3078M
22
650M
12
3079H
157
4455
1 1
3079M
7
3435W
1 1
3079W
14 ._
•
3470M
I
3080H
55
3606M .
I
3080M
8.
.
4455M
I
3081H
17
3360M
10
3089M
I
3475M
1.0
3091H
3
,
3614W
10
3091M
I
3674
9
3093H
1
.
3063M
9
3137M
—
1
.
3325M
9
3148W
1
3405M
9
3191M
I
'
3016W
.8
3193M
205
3080M
8
3193W
108
.
3320W
8
3194W
4
3361W
8
3200M
3674M
8
3202W
1
3490
7
3234M
3
3608
7
.3234W
17
3032H
7
3320M
40
3079M
.
7
3320W
8
3675
6
3325H
13
4193
5
3325M
9
.
3003W
5
3340M
I
3370H
5
3341M
13
4435W
5
3360H
14
3081
4
3360M
10
3091
4
3360W
110
3470
4
f33—(o
X-10 Skin Dose > 500 mrem by Department Number
Dept
Number >500 mrem
•
Dept
Number >500 mrem
3361M
2
3D.
4
3361W
8
3194W.
4
3363M
28
.
3743H
'
4
3363W
214
4390W
4
•
3080
. 3
336.9H
13
3369M
17 .
.
'3435
.
3
3369W
61
,
3003M
.
3
3370H
5
.
3075M
3
3370M
155
3091H
,
3
3370W
260
3234M
3
3380M
1
3602W
3
3390M
130
4435M '
3
3390W
209
3003
2
3405M
9
3410
2
3405W
.
I
3475
2
3410M
41
.
,
•
3632
2
3410W
27
4390
2
3420M
30
30168
.2
3420W
2
.
'
300.IH
2
3430M
20
3060M
2
3430W
2
3361M
2
3435W
11
3420W
2
347aM
11
.
3430W
2
3470W'
55
3612H
'
2
3475M
10
'
3642M
.
2
349CM
38
3675M '
2
3490W
20 .
4390M
2
3602H
'
17
3073
1
3602M
1
3075
1
3602W
3
.
3077
1
3606M
11
3194
1
3608M
I
'
,
3234
1
3612H
,
'
2
,
3236
1
3614M
23
3341
1
3614W
10
109
"
'
'
3345
1
3632H
3405
1
3632M
'
43
3420
1
3639H
60
.3639
1
3639M
21
4430
1
3642H
12
8410
1
3642M
2
3N
3650H
1188
3016M
365CM
124
3060W
1
3650W
140
'
3062M
3674H
106
3075W
' 1'
3674M
8
'
3089M
3674W
20
3091M
1
3675M
2
'
3093H
.
I_______
3675W
12
,
'
3137M
1
3743H
'
4
3148W
1
4390M
,
2
3191M
X-10 Skin Dose> 500 mrem by Department Number
Dept
Number >500 mrem
Dept
Number >500 mrem
4390W
4
3200M
1
,4435M
3
3202W
1
445W
5
—
3340M
1
4455M
11
338DM
465DM
12
3405W
1
II II II II II ii Ii II
21
—
3602M
(blank)
3608M
;rand Tote
18400
(blank)
63-s
B-4
X-1O.Urinalysis Data
X-1O Division Codes
'1,
, a
EDP code Division Name
AC
Analytical Chemistry
AH
Industrial Safety and Applied Health Physixs
BI
Biology
CH
Chemistry
CM
Central Management( formely DI-Directors
CS
Computer Sciences (formely MA-Mathematics)
CT
Chemical Technology
Dl
Directors now Central Management
EL
EN
Energy
ER
Employee Relations(formely PR-personnel)
ES
Environmental Safety
FM
Finance Materials
FR
Fuel Recycle
GE
(General) Engineering
HE
Health
HP
Health Physics
IC
Instrumentation & Controls
IE.
Inspection Engineering
IN
Information
IS
Isotopes Division
LP
Laboratory Protection
MA
Mathematics now Computer Sciences (CS)
MC
Metals & Ceramics
MT
MIT Engineering Practice
NP
Neutron Physics
OP
Operations
PE
plant & Equipment
PH
Physics
P1
PR
Personnel now Employee Relations (ER)
QA
QA Inspection Engineering
RE
Reactor
SS
Solid State
TH
Thermonuclear
TI
UR
Universal Relations
xx
vy
6q-l
X-1O Urinalysis Codes
Urinalysis code Radionuclide
comment
COO
Cobalt-60
CSO
Csium-137
C07
Cesium-I 37
,
no results
FPO
Fission Products
.
FUO
neodymiun-144
rare earths
GAO
Uranium-234
GBO
Strontium-90
GFO
grossed fecal
GGO
Gross Gamma•
GUO
Gross Alpha
HY3
Tritum
•
•NPO
Neptunium-237
OFO
other., fecal
PAO
protactinium-231
PA3
protactinium-233
PFO
Plutonium-239, fecl
PF3
irotactinium-233, fecal
PH2
phosphorus-32
P00
poloium-210
PUO
plutonium-239
PUI
Plutonium-241
PU9
Plutonium-239
RAO
radium-26
RFO
sodium-144, fecal
not possible
U6
ruthénium-106
SF0
Strontium-90, fecal
SF9
strontium-89, fecal
SRO
Strontium-90, fecal
SR5
strontium-85
.
SR9
strontium-89, fecal
TFO
curium-244, fecal
TPO
curium-244
UFO
uranium-234, fecal
URO
uranium-234
000
unknown isotope
001
sulfur-35
002
cobalt-60
003
Lead-210
004
Sodium-24
.__________
005
zinc-65
006
technetium-99
007
arsenic-74
008
bromine-82
009
iron-59
010
manganese-54
011
iodine-131
012
cesium-134
013
Strontium-90, fecal
014
barium-140
015
tin-125
X-1O Urinalysis Codes
Urinalysis code Radionuclide
comment
016
thallium-204
017
neptunium-237
018
sitver-11O
Plutonium-239 (pu9)
isotope
Count of isotope
dept,
PU?
Grand Total
Dept
Count
0
3
3
Grand Tot
747
3001
14
.14
.
3370
182
3003
3
3
.
3390
82
'3016
22
22
.
4650
44
3017
.
I
.
1
.
4455
39
3041
1
1
4435
.
37
3046
2
2
.
3078
25
3047
.
4
4
.
4362
•2
3050
3
3
3016
2
3060
11
11
.3193
2
3062
.
.
6
6
.3360
19
3063
1
1
3001
14
3072
2
2
3077
14
3075
12
.
.
.
12
.
3075
12
3077
.
14
14
3490
12
3078
25
25
3650
.
12
3089
3
3
. 3060
11
3090
1
1
3674
.
10
•
9
•
3091
2
2
3430
.3093
•
1
1
3234
8
3096
••
4
4
•
4460
8
3098
•
I
I
•
3475
3107
1
1
.3062
6
3109
1
1
—
3142
6
3112
•
I
•
I
3117
5
3115
1
.1
•
3405
5
3117
5
5
3657
5
3137
•
4
4
•
3047
4
3139
.1
1
3096
•
4
3140
1
1
3137
4
3141
•
I
1
3166
4
3142
.
6
•
6
3320
4
3143
2
2
3410
4
3144
.
1
1
3470
'4
3151
.
2
—
.
2
•
3615
4
•
3165
I
—.
4
1
1
._____
3003
3
1
1
3
3
1
3640
4
3166
4
0
3
3167
3171
3191
•
3050
3089
3
3
3193
20
20
3191
3
'3195
2
2
3200
3
'3200
3
•
3
3632
.3
3202
•
2
2
3046
2
3234
8
8
3072
2
•
4
4
3091
2
•
3320
3341
1
1
3143
•
2
-—
3360
19
19
3151
2
S
.
Plutonium-239 (pu9)
Count of isotope
isotope
dept
PU9
Grand 'total
•
•
Dept
Count
3361 — 2
2
,
3195
2
3369
2
.2
•
3202
2
3310
182
182
3361
2
3390
'82
82
3369
2
3405 —.
5
5
.
3420
2
2
2
2
9
3482
3634
3410
3420
3430
4
4
5
3435
2
—.
2
—:___
3435
3470
2
2
•
4390
2
4
4
.
.
3017
1
3475
7
7
3041
1
3482
2
2
•
3063
1
3483
1
1
3090
1
3490
12
12
3093
1
3615
4
4
•
3098
1
3632
3
3
3107
1
3634
2
2
.
3109
1
3640
4
4
3112
1
3650
12
12
.
3115
1
.
3141
1
3657
5
5
'
3139
1
3674
10
10
3140
1
3743
1
1
•
4163
1
1
3144
1
4360
1
1
3165
1
4362
25
25
3167
1
4390
2
2
3171
1
4430
1
1
.
3341
1
4435
5
37
37
3483
1
4455
39
39
3743
1
4460
8
8
4163
1
4650
44
44
4360
1
Grand Total
747
747
4430
1
e4-5
Plutonium-239 (PuO)
.
.
Count of isotope
isotope
.
dept
PUO
Grand Total
,
Dept
Count
0
37
37
Grand Tot
2019
3
23
23
3370
597
4
•
2601
2
2
3602
200
303
8
8
3390
177
3015
2
2
3079
127
3016
6
6
3193
97
3061
4
4
3078
86
3062
8
8
.
3325
83
3063
.
15
15
3234
61
—
3068
3
3
4370
56
3071
.16
16
3420
54
3073
.5
5
3604
49
3075
5
5
3080.
48
3077
.1
•
1
3675
44
3078
86
86
•
0
37
3079
127
127
3470
37
3080
48
48
4390
26
3081
3
3
3
23
3191
1
1
3475
22
3193
97
97
3071
.
16
3194
1
1
390
16
3195
1
•
1
3063
15
3198
1
1
3632
•
14
3200
1
1
4603
12
3234
•
61
61
3608
11
.3290
2
2
3650
10
3325
83
83
3674
10
3360
3
3
3003
8
3369
1
1
3062
8
3370
597
. 597
.
3380
8
3380
.
8
8
3614
7
•
. 3390
177
177
3016
6
3410
.3
3
3073
5
3420
54
54
3075
5
3430
1
1
3061
4
3470
37
37.
8410
4
3475
22
22
3068
3
3490
16
16
3081
3
3602
200
200
3360
3
3603
2
2
3410
3
3604
49
.
49
4193
3
3608
11
11
2601
•
2
3612
1
1
3015
2
3614
7
7
3290
2
3632
14 —
14
3603
2
—--——e
.
.1
1
4650
2
3650
10
10
3077
1
3674
10
10
3191
1
6L44,
.
Plutonium-239 (PuO)
Count of isotope
isotope
'
*
dept
PUO
— Grand Total
Dept
Count
3675
44
44
.
3194
1
4193
3
3
3195
1
437O
56
56
3198
1
4390
26
26
3200
1
4435
1
1
3369
1
4603
12
12
3430
1
4650
2
2
3612
1
8410
4
4
.3634
1
Grand Total
2019
2019
443,5
1
Gross Alpha
Count of isotope
isotope
.
dept
.
GUO
Grand Total
.
Dept
Count
0
39
39
Grand Tot
7293
3001
•
36
36
•
3370
2483
3003
324
324
. 3290
736
3004.
72
72
3078
567
3006
15
15
3470
328
. ,
3008
5
5
3003
324
:
3009
1
1
3193
264
•
3011
12
12
4362
174
3016
,
93
93
.
3475
167
3017
1
1
3490
121
3019
1
1
3420
119
3032
28
28
4435
119
3046
..
2
2
3650
114
3060
12
12
3075
110
3062
65
65
3390
107
3063
58
58
3016
93
3072
1
1
3641
93
3075
110
•110
4650
90
3077
71
71
4320
85
3078
567
567
3004
72
3089
2
2
3077,
71
3090
.
5
5
.
3630
70
3091
21
21
3062
65
3093
.
10
10
3063
58
3095
1
1
3410
50
3096
16
16
3639
49
3112
.
1
1
3194
47
3117
. .
6
8
4455
40
3136.
1
1
0.
39
3139
.
2
. 2
3001
36
3141
2
2
3405
35
3151
1
1
3191
29
3152
1
1
3430
29
3166
1
1
3032
28
3167
2
2
3632
28
3173
2
2
3435
25
3191
29
29
4193
25
.3192
5
5
4430
23
3193
•
264
264
3638
22
3194
47
47
3091
21
3195
14
14
3642
20
3200
7
7
•
3096
16
3234
5
.
5
3006
15
3290
736
•736
3360
15
3320
6
6
3195
14
3340
1
1 •________
3640
14
3341
4
.
4
4460
14
3350
1
1
3634
.
13
,
.
.
Gross Alpha
.
,
Count of isotope isotope
,
.
dept
GUO
Grand Tptal "
"
Dept
Count
3360
15,
15
3011
12
3370
2483
.2483
3060
12
3380
'
I
.
I
3843
12,
3390
107
107
•
3093
10
3405
35
.
35
.4380
10
3410
50
50
3.15
.9
3420
119.
119
4360
9
3430
29
29
4420
9
.3435
25
25
•
.
9
3470
328
328
•
3117
8
3475
167
167
4270
8
3480
2
,2
3200
7
3482
1
1
3674 '
7
3483
2
2
.
3320
6
3490
121
121
4370
.
6
3612
2
•2
.
3008
5
3615
9
9
3090
5
3630
70
70
,
3192
5
3632
28
28
3234
5
3634
13
13
3341
4
.
3638 ,
22
.
22
3649
4
.
3639
.
49
.49
3743
3640
14
14
3725
3
3641
93
93
4112
.
3
3642
20
20
4390
3
3643
12
12
3046
2
3649
4
4
3089
2
3650
114
114
3139
2
3657
2
2
3141
2
3671
2
.2
3167
2
3674
7
7 .______
3173
2
3725
3
3
3480
2
3743
.4
.
4
3483
2
4112
3
3
3612
2
4163
1
1
'
3657
2
4193
2
25
3671
2
4270
6
8
4490
2
4300
1
1
3009
1
4320
85
85
3017
1
.4360
9
9
3019
1
4362
174
174
3072
.1
4364
1
.
I
3095
1
4370
•6
6
3112 .
I
4380
10
10
.
3136
1
• 4390
3
3
3151
I
4420
9
9
. —
3152
1
4430
23
23
3166
1
4435
119
119
•
3340
1
e,4-q
Gross Alpha
.
,
,
.
Count of isotope isotope
dept
GU.O
Grand Total
Dept
Count
4455
40
40
3350
1
4460
14
14
3380
1
4490
2
2
3482
1
•
4650 .
90
90
•
4163
1
9
9
•
• .4300
•
I
Grand Total
7293
7293
4364
1
Btl.-tO
Uranium-234
Count of isotope isotope
dept
U-234
Grand Total
•
Dept
Count
0
85
85
3370
2093
3
21
21
3470
1037
4
1
1
3290
3003
789
I •
42,1
2601
2
•2
3001
47
47
3078
324
3003
421
421
3193
300
3004
29
29
3390
271
3006
11
11
4362
267
3008
3
3
3475
257
3009
1
3016
230
3011
1
3410
188
3015
5
5
.
4435
184
3016
230
230
•
4650
179
3019
1
1
3075
177
3021
1
1
3420
174
3032
10
10
•
3079
153
3047
'1
1
3490
139
3060
18
18
3602
138
3061
4
4
3641
121
3062
29
29
•
3234
91
3063
13
13
3630
86
3066
1
1
0
85
3068
2
2
3639
80
3070
1
1
3435
76
3071
20
20
4370
73
3072
1
1
3675
71
3073
10
10
3604
63
3075
177
177
•
3638
63
3077
61
61
3077
61
3078
324
324
4320
57
•
3194
49
3079
153
153
3080
6
6
3001
47
3081
3
3
3650
40
3091
18
18
•
3430
38
3093
12
12
3405
37
3094
1
1
3380
33
3096
11
11
4193
32
3112
2
2
3191
31
3137
1
1
3640
30
3142
3
3
3004
29
1
1
4390
29
3144
3148
2
2
•
3062
29
3151
—
3
3
3
21
3152
1.
1
3071
20
3173
1
1
4490
20
3325
3060
19
18
3 1
3
4
3191
3192
3193
300.
300
3091
Uraniurn-234
.
,
'
Count of isotope isotope
,
dept
U-234
Grand Total
•
•'
Dept
3195
Count
15
3194
49
49
.
•
3195
1
15
.
3642
15
3196
1
1
•
•
H 4603
15
3200
9
9
.
3063
13
3201
1
1
3608
13
3234
91
91
•
3632
13
3290
789
789
.
3093
12
3325
19
19
3375
12
•
3340
3
3
,
•
3006
11
3341
11
11
•
•
3096
11
3360
7
7
3341
11
•
3365
1
1
43.60
11
3370
•
209
2093
•
3032
10
3375
12
12
3073
10
3380
33
33
.
3615
10
3390
•
271
271
3200
9
•
3405
37
37
.
4420
9
3410
186
188
3643
8
3420
174
•
174
•
3674
•
8
3430
38
38
•
3360
7
3435
76
76
'
4380
7
3470
1037
1037
a080
6
3475
257
257
4300
6
•
3480
•
•
.3
.
.
4430
6
3482
1
1
4455
6
3483
3
3
3015
5
3490
139
139
4460
5
3602
138
138
3061
4
3604
• 63
63
3192
4
3608
13
13
3649
4
3615
.
10
10
3671
4
3630
86
86
4112
4
—
3632
13
13
3008
3
3634
2
2
3081
3
3638
63
63
•
. ,
3142
3
3639
80
80
3151
3
3640
30
30
3340
3
3641
121
121
.
3480
3
3642
15
15
3483
3
.3643
8
8
8410
3
3649
4
4
260.1
2
3650
40
40
3068
2
3671
4
4
3112
2
3674
8
8
•
.
3144
2
3675
71
71
.
3634
2
4112
4
4
4270
2
I
I
4
1
4193
32
.
32
3009
1
Uranium-234
.
Count of isotope isotope
dept
U-234
Grand Total
.
.
Dept
3011
Count
1
4270
•
2
2
4290
1
1
3019
'
1
4300
6
6
3021
I
•
3047
I
•
4320
57
57
•
4360
11
11
3066
1
. .
•
I
4362
267
267
.
3070
•
• 4370
73
73
3072
1
4380
7
7
3094
1
4390
•
29
•
29
3137
1.
4420
4430
.,
6
6
3196
1
•
9
9
3148
1
6
6
3152
1
4435
4455
184
.
184
3173
I
•
I
4460
5
5
3201
4490
,
20
20
.
3365
1
4603 ..
15
15
.
3482
I
4650
.
179
179
4163
1
8410
3
3
4290
1
(blank)
18
18
(blank)
18
Grand Total
.
9146
9146
.
Grand Tot
9146
6t4-13
Curium-244
.
,
.
.
,
Count of isotope isotope
.
'
•
Grand Tot
2909
dept
TPO
Grand ToaI
'
•
Dept
Count
0
72.
72
3
. 3
34
.
370
650
•
3602
296
.1025
1
1
3001 $
1
1
.
.
3325
217
•
,
3390
208
3003
14
14
3015
3
3
•
3078
191
3016
16
.
16
3193
150
3045
1.
,1
'3675
137
3061
9
9
.
3234
121
•
,
3080
115
3062
17
17
3063
37
37
3079
100
3068
2
2
.
3420
82
3070
1
1
3604
78
3071
9
9
•0
72
3073
5
.,5
3632
40
3074
1
1
3063
37
3075
19
19
3470
35
3077
2
2 . .
3
34.
3078
191
1.91
.
3674
33
3079
100
100
•
3650
31
3080 '
115
.
115
.
3475
23
3081
,. 7
7
.
4390
20
3088
1
1
.
3075
19
3191
3
3
'
3380
19
.
3062
17
3193
.150
150
.3194
1
1
3614
17
3195
S
5
5
3016
16
3198
1
1
3490
16
3200
2
2
3608
16
3202
1
1
4370
16
3234
121
121
.
3003
14
3290
2
2
.
3061
9
3325
217
217
3071
9
3360
1
1
3081
7
3369
4
4
,
3073
5
3370
650
650
. 3195
5
3380
19
19
8410
5
—
4
3390
20E
1
208
—
3369
3405
1
.
.__-
3410
4
I
-
-
4650
4
3420
82
82
3015
3
3470
35
35
3191
3
3475
23
23
..
3634
3
3490
16
.
16
3068
2
3602
296
296
3077
2
3603
2
2
3200
2
3604
78
78
3290
2
3608
16
16
3603
2
q-lt4
Curium-244
•
Dept
•
Count of isotope isotope
dept
TPO
Grand Total
3612
1
1
4193
2
3613
1
1
1025
1
3614
17
17
3001
•
3632
40
40
.
3045
I
3634
3
3
3070
1
, ,
3639
1
1
3074
I
3650
31
31
3088
1
•
3674
33.
33
3194
1
3675
137
137
3198
I
•
3202
1
4112
1
1
•
4193
2
2
•
•
•
3360
1
16
16
3405
1
20
• 20
3612
1
4370
4390
•
1
3613
1
4435
1
4650
•
3639
4112
•
1
I
8410
4
5
4
5
.
Grand Total
2909
2909
4435
1
•Strontium-90
.
COunt of isotope isotope
.
dept
SRO
Grand Total
Dept
Count
0
122
122
.._______ Grand Tot
14238
•
3370
2192
3
19
19
•
.
3078
1107
13
1
1
1025
1
1
3390
'1008
2601
1
1
3470
874
3001
126
126
3290
735
'
3003
295
295
3650
683
3004
141
141
3193
547
1
16
3475
404
3006
3008
23
23
3490
415
3009
2
2
3016
388
3011
3
3
.
3075
359
3015
6
6
4435
350
3016
388
388
4455
312
3017
1
1
3003
295
3019
2
2
•
3602
' 237
3032
8E
85
3410
228
3041
3
.
3435
210
3046
Ii
11
3420
204
3047
16
16
3639
188
3050
9
9
3234
174
3060
88
88
3674
158
3061
5
5
3638
150
3062
114
114
3360
143
3063
76
76
.
3004
141
3068
1
1
•
3077
134
3070
1
1
3001
126
3071
12
12
3430
126
3072
11
11
3325
125
3073
12
12
3632
125
3074
1
1
0
122
3075
359
359
—_______
3062
—
114
3077
134
134
3630
99
54
54
3641
86
3078
3079
1107
1107
3060
88
3080
1
1
3032
85
3081
9
9 ..
3405
79
3085
4
4
3063
76
3086
5
5
3380
63
3079
54
4460
54
3088
1
1
3194
56
—
3089
10
10
3090
14
14
—
3091
'
39
39
3640
47
3093
18
, 18
4390
45
3094
4
4
3191
43
3095
3
3
.
3096
28
28
3091
39
4650
39
3320
38
3097
1
1
.
Strontium-90
Count of isotope isotope
,
.
SRO.
Grand Total
,
• Dept
Count
dept
3098
1
1
,
4430
37
3100
1.
1
•
•
•
3117
35
3107
14
14
3615
31
3109
2
2
3634
•
30
3112
1
1
•
3341
29
3115
1
1
•
3096
28
3117
35
35
3195
25
3133
2
.
3643
25
3136
2
2
,
3006
23
3137
4
4
,
.
3657
23
3139
6
6
•
3642
22.
3140
5
. 5
4490
20
3141
18
18
3
19
3142
14
14
3152
19
3143
4
4
.
•
3093
18
3144
6
6
•
3141
18
3148
3
.
3
3483
18
3151
7
7
.
4193
17
3152
19
19
3008
16
3160
I
.
3047
•
16
3165
6
6
3090
14
3166
E
8
3107
14
3167
1
13
.
3142
14
3171
1
.1
3167
13
3173
5
5
3200
13
3191
4S
43
•
3071
12
3192
5
5
.
•
3073
12
3193
54.
547
.
4362
12
3194
56
56
.
3046
11
3195
25
25
.
3072
11
3196
5
5
3743
11
3198
1
1
3089
10
3200
13
13
3050
9
3201
2
2
.
3081
9
3202
4
. 174
4
.
3482
9
3234
174
3166
8
3290
735
735
.
•
3151
.
7
3320
38
38
3671
7
3325
125
125
4364
7
3340
3
3
.29
4370
7
3341
29
3015
6
3350
5
5
3139
6
3360
143
143
.
.
3144
6
3361
6
6
•
3165
6
3365
1
1
3361
6
3369
6
6
—
3369
6
3370
2192
2192
3649
6
3380
63
63
4112
6
Strontium-gO
•
6
Count of isotope isotope
dept.
.
SRO
Grand Total
.
Dept
Count
3390
1008
1008
4360
6
3405
79
79
.
4380
6
3410
228
3420
204
228
204
(blank)
3061
,
5
3430
126
126
3086
5
3435
210
210
•
3140
5
3470
874
874
,
.
3173
5
3475
404
: 404
.
3192
5
3480
3
3
3196
•
5
3481
1
1
3350
5
3482
9
.
9
4270
5
3483
18
18
3085
.
4
3490
415
415
3094
4
3602
237
237
. 3137
4
3608
1
1
.
3143
4
3612
2
2
.
3202
,
. 4
3613
2
2
4163
4
3615
31
.
31
.
4320
4
3630
99
99
3011
3
3632
125
125
.
.
3041
3
3634
30
30
3095
3
•
3638
• 150
150
3148
3
3639
188
188
3340 .
•
3
•
3640
47
47
3480
3
3641
86
86
.
8410
.
3
3642
22
2
3009
2
3643
25
2
3019
2
3648
Z
2
.
3109
2
3649
E
6
3133
2
3650
68
683
3136
2
3657
• 2
23
3201
2
3671
7
7
3612
2
3674
158
158
.________
•
3613
2
3743
11
11
,
3648
2
.4112
6
6.
13
1
•
4163
4
4
1025
1
4193
17
17
2601
1
4270
5
5
3017
1
4290
1
•
I
3068
1
4320
4
4
•
300
4360
6
6
• 3074
1
-
4362
12
12
3080
. I
4364
7
..
7
.
3088
1
4370
7
7
. 3097
1
4380
6
'6
3098
1
4390
45
.
45
3100
1
4430
37
37
3112
.
I
4435
—
350
350
3115
1
Strontium-90
,
-
,
.
.
Count of isotope isotope
dept
SRO,
Grand Total
•
•
Dep
Count
4455
31.
312
•
3160
1
4460
54:
54
3171
1
4490
20
20
-
.
3198
1
4650
39
39
.
3365
1
8410
3
3
3481
1
(blank)
6
6
.
3608
1
Grand Total
14238
14238
4290
1
6
Tritium
Cduntofisotôpe isotope
dept
HY3
Grand Total
Dept
Count
0
44
44
Grand Tot
4355
3
34
34
3602
. 1047
3001
—
4
4
—
.
3369
434
.
3003
21
.
21
3675
326
3009
1
1
3325
270
3011
'1
1
3405
P238
3015
2
2
3193
234
3016
4
49
,
3079
206
3060
—
1
1
3604
169.
3062
67
67
•
3075
125
.
4
3080
106
3063
4
•
4455
103
3068
.
2
3071
2.
3
3390
73
3073
4
4
3490
71
3075
.125
125
.
3062
67
3077
-
2
2
3370
67
•
3650
•65
3078
51
51
3079
206
206
3363
61
3080
106
106
3430
57
3081
.
9
3380
55
3193
234
234
3078
.
51
3195
12
12
3016
49
3203
2
0
44
3234
.
2
2
.
3420
40
3320
2
.
3470
37
3325
270
270
.
3410
35
3341
3
3
.3
34
3360
32
32
3360
32
3361
31
31
3475
32
3363
61
61
3361
31
3369
434
434
4603
27
3370
67
67
3003
21
3380
55
55
.
3195
.
12
3390
73
73
.
.
4193
11
3405
238
238
3638
10
3410
35
35
3081
9
3420
40
40
3435
9
3430
57
57
•
3608
7
3435
3470
9
9
3636
6
37
32
37
3657
5
3475
32
4435
5
3483
2 -
2
—
3001
4
3490
7t
71
•
.
3063
4
3602
1047
1047
3073
.4
•
3639
4
3604
189
189
3608
7
7
.
3071
3
3614
3
3
3341
3
3636
6
6
3614
'
.
Tritium
Count of isotope
isotope.
•
Dept
Count
,
'
.
.
dept
.
HY.3
Grand Total
•
3638
10
10
3015
2
3639
4
.
4
.
3Q68
2
3643
2 .
2 .
..
•
'3077
2
3650
65
65
3203
2
3657
5
5
3234
2
3675
. 326
326
•
3320
2
4193
11
11
3483
2
4390
1
1
.
3643
.2
•
4405
2
•
4405
2
2
4430
2
2
4430
2
4435
5
5
•
4650
2
4455
103
103
8410
2
4603
27
27
3009
1
4650
2
'2
3011
1
8410
2
•
2
3060
1
•
4390
1
1.
1
•
I_________
•
I
Grand Total
435E
4355
B-5
X-1O In-Vivo Data
X10 Ir Vivo testing (l9xx - l9xx) (all data) vs HP Area and Division
:
.
ftt
type_
AR CH CR OT SC TC TH 'NB WN WO
hparea
.
Grand Total
I
I
I
.1
I
ô
7
7
8
7
7
8
0
•
7
2
1
29
4
7
.
50
,1
•
I
•
I
I
3
1
4
64
1
65
•
I
•
I
.
I
'
I
.
4
2
3
2
9
2
39
2
224
246
147
•
658
1
.
'
3
50
3
1
57
2
2
.1
1
.2
23
25
2
1
8
•
1
54
3
156
7
5
171
9
.
9
.
1.
1
2
117
19
.
138
1
1
5
7
•
7
47
48
9
111
1
25
13
17
56
4
.
4
.
7
7
21
21
1
907
2011
2016
2026
2525
2626
3001
3017
3019
3037
3038
3042
3047
3508
3550
4500
4501
4505
5500
5505
7900
7920
9241
973
9735
2
35
10
3
2
52
977:1
.
7
61
1
5
880
364
8
188
'
3
1517
2
6
.8
.
3
3
5
16
21
7
4
11
24
•
32
56
22
14
36
5
4
9
7
9
16
•
15
44
59
1
2
3
3
28
11
42
3
2
5
I
I
I
3
2 —
6
2
2
2008
2012
2016
3001
3019
3038
3517
3550
4500
4508
5500
5505
7500
7900
7920
X1O lr.-Vivo testing (l9xx - l9xx) (all data) ye. HP Affla and Division
1
134
3
281
Countoftype_
division
hparea
type_
—, —
—
AR Cl-I CR 01, SC TC. TH W6 WN WO Grand Total
AH
971
AH Total
..
.
1
8
2
138
1
BI
.
.
.
4
I
,79C0
I
.
I
•9p1
.4
9211
.
9
.9
,
.
9771
•
—
.
1
14
18
21
54
•
.
78
I
2
18
78
18
69
B! Total
CH
•
3019
._
1 '1
•
2
.
.
.
•
I
3553
,
1.
5
6
4500
.
, . 7
•29
20
9
65
5500
1
10
37
48
5505
'
I
•
2
13
61
1
78
7920
I
CHTotaI
.
9
121
77
70
1
278
CM
3500
1
I
4500
•
,
.
.
.
I
I
5500
.
I
I
.
CMTotal
1
2
3
CS
2008
.
1
I
4500
.
2
2
CSTotal
.
3
3
.
I
24
3
205
21
253
CT
.
•
3
18
14
8
43
1000
1
1
2026
I
I
3019
31
2
107
270
1
221
.632
3038
1
1
2
.3503
.
5
5
3505
1
1
3508
18
18
3550
.
3591
.
1
.
I
3592
.
1
1
4500
28
242
166
2
24
462
.
.
.
4501
1
1
2
4505
2
38
40
45C7
3
16
3
22
455
.
1
1
.
.
55C3
5
7
31
28
8
3
.
82
5505
1
1
7509
1
1
7720
1
1
7803
I
I
7900
7
2
64
100
17
2
192
7920
38
48
41
127
92C:1
•
I
44
I
9771
.
1
.
8
3
56
CT Total
105
3
11
799
696 11
320
2
1947
DI
I
1
1
1
I
2
S5-
X10 ln-Vivo testing (l9xx - l9xx) (all data) vs. HP Area and Division
2001
I
.1
Count of pe_
pe_
— — — —
— —
AR CH CR OT SC TC TH WB WN WO. Grand Total
division
. hparea
Dl
•
3019
2
1
.
1
1
5
5
.____
•
2
3550
4500
5000
•
6
5
9204
2
2
Dl Total
.
1
1
17
. =
'19
EL
.
1
—
3
.3
55dp
15
8
23
.
2
. 2
,
36
54
8
38
64
;
EL Total
6000
EN
3001
.
.
,
2
2
450D
I
I
EN Total
•
3
.
3
EQ
20S
.
3
3
.
3001 .
2
2
.
.
3019
3038
.
17
.3
'
17
3
3517
4
4
'.
353
4
.
4
4508
.
1
1
5500
— —
—
•
14
.
14
5505
.
—:
7
7900
..
2
2
EQ Total
.
.
57
.
57•
EP
6000
6010
6
.
6
5
5
EPTotal
.
.
11
11
ER
I
2016
3
3
ERTotal
.
,
3
3
. 2008
.
3
3
ES
.
•
.
3019
25
40
110
47
222
3500
1
1
3550
10
19
29
ES Total
.
.
25
40
121
69
.
255
ET
3001
1
. 3
4
3550
•
.
I
•
9771
.
3
3
ETTotal
1
7
8
FM
3001
1
1
3517
1
1
4500
1
2
3
FMTotal
••
1
4
.
5
FR
200,8
10
10
76C0
1
•
I
FRTotal
11
11
GE
1
7
8
2008
1
I
2013
79
79
3001
•
I
I
135.-
X10 ln-Vivo testing (l9xx - l9xx) (all data) vs. HP Area and Division
Count of type_
type_
—
—
division
hparea
AR ICH CR OT.SC
IC TH IWB
WN WO
Grand Total
•
.
'I
•
GE
.
. 3019
3038
,,
•
2
1
.
3
.
.
1
14
14
I
7900
—— —
GE Total
.
.
.
1
8
82
16
•
107
HE
.
,
2008
.
.•
1
I
3550..
5
5
.10
4500
'
3
3
HETotal
.
8
6
14
HP
I
15
I
18
I 0
136
2001
56.
56
2007
•
,
3
——
—.
•
.
•
20
.
20
3
2008
11
1.1
2016
4
75
1
77.
6
1
.
164
2026
2
2
2523
3
.
3
2620
I
I
30,i
2
23
6
31
3017
301.9
•
8
87
36 —
131
302S
,
2
2
3037
6
.
6
.
308
2
.21
8
2
33
3042
2
•
2
3047
.
6.
.
6
3504
29
29
3508
2
2
3517
•
11
6
2
17
3525
——
2
.3550
.
.
17
7
24
4500
1
.
118
17 —
136
4501
1
1
4507
.
2
2
4508
.
1
1
2
5000
4
.
4
5500
3
50
7
60
5505
3
1
4
6000
,
.
3
3
7000
1
1
7017
1
1
7500
1
1
2
7503
.
2
2
7710
.
19
5
24
79G0
1
1
23
21
.
46
7920
.3
3
9201
1
1
9204
3
.
3
9207
1
.
I
9213
1
1
9771
HP Total
19
94
18
2
733 127
3
996
13
5
18
65-4
Xl 0 lr-Vivo testing (1 9xx I 9xx) (all dtà) vs. HP Area and Division
Count of type_
type_
— —
—
—
AR OH CR OT SC TC TH WBIWNWO Grand
.
I
.
,
division
•
hparea
HS
2013
I
79
.
3038
•
.
36
43
4500
.
5505
—
I
—
7500
1
.
9
10
17
7900
10
6
1
.
HSTotal
11
— —
43 —
55 — —
•'•
.109
.23
IC
1
3
20
•
.
.
.
200
•1
I
2
2007
•
2
•
1
•
2008
.
1 ..
201.2
1
'
.
•
20
8
•
11
.
•
2013
1
2016
3
2026
1
.
.
I
4
2506
4
39
3001
3005
I
.1
4
3010 .
4
.,
3019
3
6
12
22
.
.
43
.
I
3025
.
.
.
I
•
.
.
3038
2
2
1
5
27
3042
27
.
3500
197
4
201
3517
2
2
3550
1
1
30
1
44
•
45qo
18
1
,
19
.
4508
.4
.
ssdo
1
1
8
4
55
•
6000
.
12
6
18
6025
4
.
4
.
.
.
7500
.
4
11
7503
II
2
..
7509
2
77
7
.
.
7
2
771.3
2
.
7903
.
3
3
.
28
3
2
33
8
7920
9201
17
17
,
9204
14
14
97
2
2
2000
48
1
.
IC Total
. 5
3
2
491
52
93
646
49
JE
2013
I
.
I
1
2016
1
2518
2
2
.
1
3012
1
3019
25
60
68 3
156
4500
19
19
1
5500
1
X10 In-Vivo testing (l9xx - 'l9xx) (all data) vs. HP Area and Division
Count of typ
division
e_
hparea
type_
.
AR CH — —
CR OT SC
— —
TC TH WB WN
I
Grand Total
lE
.
7930
I
9201
.
3
3
971
•
—.
I
lETotal
25
138
68
4
.235
IN
•
2008
•
.
7
•
7
T
4500
6
6
9771
•
1
1
•
1
13
' .
14
IN Total
•
131
1
•
10
20
100
1
.
3001
.1
.
.
.
'
I
•
3019
•IS .
•
2
•
.
I
I
.
3026
.
.
4
.
.
.
4
3027
•
2
3028
1
18
1
20
3029
•
•
17
•
17
3030
I
3031
2
2
•
.1
3033
•
•,
•
98
7
.
20
291
3037
3038
44
2
20
140
•
3047
1
30
31
3092
1
•
I
3517
15
79
29
123
3550
•
25
65
• 81
•
171
9201
4
7
11
9771
24
38
•
62
IS Total
.
100 20
2
512
249
7
890
LP
.
1
1
I
•
1
I
1
2
LPTotal
2008
I
MA
4500
.4
.
.
4
5500
1
1
9771
1
1
1
4
18
22
MATotal
6
6
MC
•
2506
2
•
2
2528
2
•
2
3001
4
•
2
6
3012
3
3
3019
1
1
6
6
14
.
3025
1
.
1
.
.
.
•
3525
28
28
35O
—•
I
16
12
•
29
450
I
218
• 2
1
•
•
222
4501
1
1
4508
1
133
19
12
165
5500
6
104
89
1.99
•
•
•
5505
1
.
I
6000
2
•
2
•
7900
2
1
13
9
25
X10 In-Vivo testing (l9xx - l9xx) (all data) vs. HP Ares and Division
Count of type_
type_
.
— —.
— — —
division
hparea
'
.
AR Cl-I CR OT SC TC. TH WB WN WO
Grand Total
MC
7929
.4
2
6
9201
..
7,
.
7
9771
,
1
I
736
4
MCTotàl
MO
2016
16
2
—
562 Jj
15
—
—
•
14
.
,—
4
11
S
3
1
3001
4
4
.
MOTotal
NP.
3010
2
IG
21
.
.
10
10
3115
,
6
•
6
.4500
•
'1
,
31.
32
550
,
42
5
I
48 .
605
.
•
1
.
.
I
7000
.
7202
1
'
I
7700
'
2
7
7
7702 .____
24
26
.
7710
1
2
.
1
•
4
7900
..
13
2
15
•
32
9213
,
9
23
.
.
'
I
.10
9241
9771
1
I
9
NP Total
.
17
3
203
8
1
232
1
3
163
166
OP
2008
19
19
2016
5
30
13
48
.
I
I
2026
.
2325
1
1
. 2523
4
4
•
3001
2
62
55
78
197
3005
1
1
.
3010
3
3
301,9
1
2
4
II
17
3025
6
7'
69
,
71
3026
2
3028
1
1
•
3038
'
2
1
31
170
1
257
462
3042
53
1
54
3517
30
52
82
3525
23
'
23
.
3550
1
39
37
60
137
1
1
4500
.
I
1
6000
4
7002
1
5
7500
.
2
I
I
7804
2
.
7819
.
I
•
I
7900
79.O
I
59 139
17
1
97
2
296
20
9213
1
.
I
-t
X10 In-Vivo testing (l9xx - l9xx) (aD data) vs. HPArea and Division
•
pe_
.
— — —
AR CH CROT'SC TC TH WB WN ?1 Grand Total
1
6
6
13
hparea
9771
.
Count of type_
division
OP
OPTbtal
23
1 571 456 '1 583 — —
1635
0
I
PE
1
25
83
1000
.
.
69
.—
69
2000
.
.
1,
—
I
2001
1______
103
,'•
$ •
103
2008
2010
.1_____
I
•
7
2013
50_____
50
2012
.1 6
-
•
.
---
72
2016
.
30
94
81
..
•
205
6
2018
.6_
2026
-2506
3
16- —
.
3
16
:16
2516
16____
5
2518
2525
725______
2526
I
38
25e-7
38
.-
2612
7
.5
.
12
.
1
2
1
2804
30C-i
•
•
25
36
61
I
125
2
3010
3014
3019
2
—
i___ .—
25
72 159 —
180 —
4
.
•t
440
31
3024
3025
•
31.
12
12
2
3026
2
—
I
3031
1.
9
3034
8
1
3035
I
I
102
3038
1
6
52_
43
3042
—.
33
.
33
,
3
.
34
1
4
5
33
3044
15
..
15
12
3047
3074
——
84
1
3115
1
.
3500
3
3
67
3
1
3087
1
3104
84
—-—
.
3502
3505
.
67
3
--
81
3517
.
19
2
. 60
22
3525
22
3547
,-
I
66
3550
4
8 2232__
1
3570
1
.
3578
1
.
3587
89
89
X10 lrVivo testing (l9xx - l9xx) (all data) vs. HP Area and Division
Count of type_
division
hparea
type_
AR CH —
CR 01,
.
SC
IC
—
TI-I WB WN WO
Grand Total
PE
.
•
3592
1
22
10
.
4500
.,
•
2
•
84
118
4501
.
.
I
7
.
.
,3
.
3
450
4507
•
.
7
•
4508
12
6
9
27
•
1
.
.•
7
18
42
6
5500
5505
.
16
Ti
.
6000
Ii
5
43
59
6010
2
2
7000
:
3
3
.
I
1
7001
.
.
7002
8
96
104
7003
,
.
9
.
9
70Q4
1
•
.
I
.
7005
.
8
8
.7007
•
17
17
7008
.
I
I
7009
.
.
.
•
,
12
12
7012
114
114
7015
6
6
7500
7503
•'
.4
42
2
•
.
.
6
42
7506
.
I
I
7520
.
I
I
.
77Q3
3
3
77C2
.
I
I
7715
.
.1
1
2
.
1
16
.78C4
782
9
7
.
1
79CJ
2
10
79
39
1
131
791:0
.
6
2
8
7920
,
10
12
22
1
1
1
PETotal
98
5
2 1479
507
618
5
2714
PH
.
I
I
3OGD
.
4500
52
1
53
5500
31
.
8
39
.
6000
2
8
20
30
.
6010
2
2
PH Total
86
9
31
126
P1.
4500
5
5
5500
1
1
PITotal
6
6
PR
1
2
2
2016
1
1
2
4500
1
1
1
1
.
49
95
144
PRTotal
3
1
1
5
QA
3001
3019
.
X10 In-Vivo testing (l9xx - l9xx) (all data) vs. HP Area and Division
Count of type_
division
hparea
type_
.
'AR CH CR OT SC
TC TH WB
WN 51
.
Grand Total
QA
3047
.
9
9
7900
.
1
1
2
.
.
50
•
106
156
QA Total
.
RC
1
8
.
.8
2024
73
3
.
3001
.
•
2
2
3Q1
5
5
.
3025
1
•.
I
30�6
2
.
.
.
2
3038
1
1
3042
4
,
4
3550
1
.
.
.
.
I
4500 ____
•
10
69
14
1
94
4501
28
.28
5500
20
4
.
24
7900
2
. 2
9102
1
.
.
.
I
9201
.
11
11
9204
4
.
4
9241
2
.
.
2
9771
5
RCTotal
10
—
169
18
1
.
198
RE
. I
2
5
.
25
2024
I
.
.
I
,
3001
.
3
.
3
4500
1
1
5500
3
.
.
3
7500
10
27
12
49
7503
19
19
7509
.
4
.
4
.
7900
.
.
.
28
10
.
38
9201
4
4
9204
.
2
2
.
9241
1
1
,
9243
1
I
9771
.
17
5
22
.
12
5
126
18
12
. 173
RE Total
SS
.
.
1
.
20
20
.
30Q1
7
.
7
301
3
2
6
.
11
3025
1
I
3038
•
104
24
. 2
130
35Sb
.
,
.
1
.1
2
5500
1
.
,
7900
1
1
SSTotal
,
31
108
31
3
173
TH
I
9201
1
I
THTotal
I
I
1
1
6
6
TI
°1
4500
85-10
X10 In-Vivo testing (l9xx.- l9xx) (all data) 'is. HP Area and Division
.
AR Cl-I CR
•_
,
TH
WNLWO
—
I
3
Countoftype_
type_
—,—
WB
Grand Total
division
hparea
TI
5500
9771
OT
.1.3
11
TITotal
.
:
•
ii
I
UR
55C0
.
I
,
1
1
:
2
(JR Total
.
•
•
2
XX
1
2
4
•
80
2
I
89
I
3001
.
.
I
•
.
35
3033
•
35
3047
.
,
4
.
1
4508
.
.
1
,
I
7920
.
I
,
•
49
9771
48
1
.
2 .4
80
53
9
40
1
180
XX Total
VY
9771
i
I
YvTotal
I
(blank)
I(blank)
.
•
•
.
(blank) Total
I
13914
Grand Total
II
7 26 619 .64 38 7160 3418j 47 2519
1
14
135-I I
Appendix C
c-i
Y-12 Job Titles
. ,
Y-12 Job Titles
(abbrevited listing --job titles that appeared more than 10 times in CEDR database)
732
ACCOUNTANT
15
ACCOUNTANT I
13
ACCOUNTANT II
28
ACCOUNTING ANA
39
ACCOUNTING ASS.
31
ACCOUNTING CLE
ACCOUNTING SUP
94
-
17
ADMINISTRATIVE
153
AIDE COMPUTER-
11
AIDE ENGINEER
72
AIDE INSPECTOR
16
AIDELABORATORY
34
AIR COND & REF
31
ANAL
29
ANALYST ASSAY
96
ANALYST LAB
.417
ANALYSTANALLAB
48
ANALYTICAL CHE
6
APPLIED HEALTH
84
ASSEMBLY ENGIN
21
ASSEMBLY FOREM
13
ASSEMBLY PERSO
2
ASSEMBLYMAN____
127
ASSEMBLYMAN A
69
ASSEMBLYMAN B
128
ASSEMBLYMAN C
16
ASSEMBLYPERSON
IASSIGNMENT SPE 245
-ii_
(ASSISTANT ENGR
SISTANT OPER
SSISTANT PROD
ASSISTANT TECH
11
44
—
11
101
34
39
113
ASSOCIATE ASSE
orri
ASSOClATE DESI
—
28
47
.
42
20
FASOcIATEDEVE
ASSOCIATE ENGR
13
26
iiT?s Tã
ASST CHEMISTRY
1ASST ENGINEER___
!ASST OPERATOR
ÔE
1ASSTSKILTRA
13
13
133
.
12
ASST SKILL TRA
38
ASST STATISTIC
ASST TECHNICAL
ASST, GEN. SUP
ASST. GENERAL
L!LI.
cI-I
Y-12 Job Titles
(abbreviated Ii'ting —job titles that appeared more than 10 times in CEDR database)
!ATTENDANT TOOL
22
IA11ENDANTCOUNT.
28
[ATTENDFIRSTAID
-
16
18
-—
IBENEFIT_PLANS.
14
BOILERMAKER___
23
BUDGETING AND
37
BUILDING SERVI
.1255
CAPTAIN FIRE
18
237
CARPENTER APPR
14
CASHIER AND GR
73
CHAUFFEUR
24
CHECKERPROPERT
13
CHEM
.
14
CHEMICAL OPER
70
CHEMICAL OPERA
627
CHEMIST
331
CHEMIST ANAL
14
CHEMISTASSOC
115
CHEMIST DEV
.
18
CHEMIST I
39
CHEMIST II
42
CHEMIST III
44
CHEMIST IV
21
CHEMISTASSOCIA
21
CHIEF FILES &
-
13
CHIEFFILESAN
19
CLEANER
1008
CLEANRLABEQUIP
17
CLERICAL ASSIS
100
CLERICAL TRAIN
55
CLERK
1478
CLERK CONTROL
17
CLERK EDPM
28
CLERK FILE
40
CLERK FOREMANS
21
CLERK KEYPUNCH
49
CLERK MAIL
EERfor
CLERK MATERIAL
13
348
Th
13
CLERK PROPERTY
1CLERK RECORD
LE556
EtAi6
CLERK TYPIST
LkAööu,TW'
41o
CLERKACCOUNTNG
13
CLERKRECEIVING
71
CLERKTABULATIN
46
COAL HANDLING
15
COMMUMCA1]ONS
17
Y-12 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing — job titles that appeared more than 10 times in CEDR database)
13
249
OMPUTERAPPLI
'COMPUTING ANAL
ICOMPUTING APPL
rCOMpUTING CONS
1O1MPUTING SPEC
COMPUTING TECH
rc0NsuLTANTDEv
20
166
52
17
FCONS15LTANTE
14
CONTROL CENTER
CONTROL OPER
34
12
COOK
cO-oP STUDENT
COORt)PRODUCTN,
.__20
389
18
COORDFABRICATN
öOORDINATOR -
13
. 15
ESTIMATOR__.
CRANEANDHEAV..,
11
29
CUSTODIAL FORE
17
DATA ENTRY CLE
35
DEPT. HD. - EN
144
DEPT. HD. - LA
25
DEPT. HD. - MA
34
pEPT.HD.-PR —
DEPT. HD.- SH
DEPT.HD. - TE
15
28
15
DEPT.SUPT. -
156.
[bESIGN ENGINEE
103
IDESIGNSUPERVI
DESIGN TECHNOL
19
39
DESIGNER
.
-
84
DETLR ESTMTR
17
DETLRANDESTMTR
—
13
DEVELOPMENT AS
280
DEVELOPMENT CH
24
DEVELOPMENT EN
.
DEVELOPMENT GR
68
DEVELOPMENT SP
.
36
DEELOPMENT ST
252
DISPATCHER MAT
116
FDISPATCHERBATC
14
IbRAFTINGTECHN
.
DRAFTSMAN
.
DRAFTSMAN ENGR
66
289
165
DRAFTSMAN TRAI
40
rbGo1
EDP AIDE
EDP ASSISTANT
154
92
39
[EDP JOB CONTRO
.
79
IEDP LEADER
11
EDP SPECIALIST
20
EDPSUPPORTSP
12
EDP TECHNICIAN
.
. 62
C,L-3
Y-12 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing --Job titlesthat appeared, more than 10 times in CEDR database)
39
ELECTRCN MAINT
tALKp
ELECTRICIAN
1ELECTROPLATER
EMPMSTRCOMPARE"
29
1714
115
JL
ENG
199
1ENGINEER
585
rENGINEER - EST
IENGUJEER-F!R
rEiiE—
11
14
36
iEtJ
ENGINEER - PRO
ENGINEERASSO
13
12
1&E5 Th
11EAf
i
95
ENGINEER I
337
457
ENGINEER II
ENGINEER III
700
ENGINEER IV
440
ENGINEER MAINT
31
ENGINEER OPER
14
ENGINEER PROD
48
ENGINEER SUPER
33
ENGINEERDESIGN
87
ENGINEERINDUST
17
ENGINEERING Al
.
32
ENGINEERING AS
231
ENGINEERING DE
23
ENGINEERING DR
T
127
171
201
ENGINEERING PR
f
28
ENGINEERING SP
tENGINEERING TE
[ENGINEERINSPEC
ENGINEERMATERI
17
21
ENGINEERPROCES
rENGINEERPROJEC
ENGINEERSAFETY
1ENGR ASSOC DES
17
18
14
15
ENGR ASSOC DEV
47
ENGR ASSOCPROD
.16
12
15
ENGR SPEC PROJ
ENGRASSOCMAINT
[ENVIRONMENTAL
35
[EXECUTIVE SECR
26
FABRICATION CO
17
FABRICATOR
59
FLECLERKt
Y-12 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing -- job titles that appeared more thafl 10 times in CEDR database)
1ñtEVICE
45
1RE&GUARDL -
—
21
1RE AND GUARD
146
FIRE PROTECTIO.
46
FIRE SERVICEMA
26
FIRETRUCKOPE
101
FlREMAN
36
1FOOD SERVICES
16
FORE
172
FORE ASST PROC
148
FORE ASSTCRAFT
237
FOREASSTINSPEC
15
FOREASSTPROCES
29
FOREMAN CRAFT
471
FOREMAN INSPEC
40
FOREMAN LABOR
39
FOREMAN MAINT
IFOREMAN RSWP
3
.11
IFOREMAN_STORES
IFOREMANASSEMBL
LFOREMANFOUNDRY
1FOREMANGROUNDS
16
19
14
13
EFOREMANJANITOR
IFOREMANMACHINE
13
64
FOREMANMACHINI
77
FOREMANMATERIA
28
FOREMANPROCESS
246
FOREMANSALVAGE
17
FOREMANUTILITI
12
FOREMANUTILITY
13
14
—
45
23
98
JFOUNDRYMAN
GARAGEMECHANI
IGEN.SUPV.-I
[GEN. SUPV. - M
1U-i
GEN.SUPV.-U
16
[GENERAL HELPER
141
GROUNDS EQUIPM
GUARD
H. P. TECHNICI
- 12
886
24
HAND MACHINE
68
HANDLER
LHANDLER MAT
HANDLERMATERIA
HANDLERSALVA
12
17
24
312
171
IHEADDEVDEPT
rAAftr
HEAD PROC DEPT
7.
13
[HEALTH PHYSICS
186
HELPER
325
HELPRSKILTRA
26
HUMAN RESOURCE
.
53
ct-5
•
Y-12 JobTitles
(abbreviated listing -- job titles that appeared more than 10 times in CEDR database)
, ,
tH-V-EINSPECTO
35
ILLUSTRATOR
27
ILLUSTRATOR II
17
INDUSTRIAL HYG
89
INFORMATION AS
20
[iitToWW
1INFORMATION RE
44
13
INSPECPRODFAB
69
T4
INSPECTION ENG
11
JINSPECTION FOR
22
[INSPECTION TEC
—.
17
LINSPECTOR
INSPECTORAIDE
20
4
JINSPECTQR MATR
.11
FINSPEcTOR SHOP
91
[iNSPECTOR-WELD
72
[INSTRUMENT MEC'
65
[INSULATOR
INTERVIEWER______
88
21
INTVR
12
IRON WORKER AN
65
JANITOR
393
1JANITRESS
19
[JUNIOR STUDENT
30
KEEPER
1KEYPUNCHI
SALVYD
25
25
KEYPUNCH II
17
KEY PUNCH TRAI
50
•
•
26
LAB ANALYST
•
12
LABORATORY AID
öYAA
35
158
LABORATORYSUP
21
LABORATORYlEO
96
LABORER
1108
LIEUTENANT-P
64
LINEMAN
14
M.S: PROGRAMME
MA
[MACH PROD FAB
333
MACHINESPECIA
677
[MACHINE SPECIAL
MACHINETOOLS
MACHINING FORE
11
77
62
1MACHINING GENE
14
MACHINIST
3697
MACHINIST-EX
.
.54
6iPkO
MACHINiST
Oi-iiThW
(PRO
904
iN!S1fPP___
Y-1 2 Job Titles
(abbreviated Ii.ting --job titles that appeared more than 10 tins in CEDR dtabase)
31
MACI-IINISTMAINT
50
MACHINISTSETUP
forKN
IMAINTENANCE EN
30
MAINTENANCE GE
2.1
[MAINTENANCE PL
FMANMATERIALS
MAN PARTS
IMAN SHOP MAINt
MATERIAL EXPED
A1 iAtrb1W
MATERIALS INSP
MATERIALS SPEC
MATERIEL ASSIS
—
38
135
30
122
MATERIAL HANDL
603
MATERIALS AND
51
MATERIALS CLER
179
*
222
32
12
18
14
MATHEMATICIAN
1MATL. ORDER CL
[MATL. PLANNER
[1ATL.REC.AND
[MECH DEV EQUIP
ECHANIC
iMECHANICDEV
1MECHANIC ELECT
[MECHANIC EQUIP
11ECHANIC INST___
MECHANIC INSTR
MECHANIC MAINT
MECHANICGARAGE
MECHELECTMAINT
MEDICAL TECHNI
21
55
17
15
19
105
19
49
46
149
•24
13
16
18
14
39
18
127
1METALFABRICAT
METALLURGIST
MICROGRAPHICS.
MILLWRIGHT
IMOBILE CRANE 0
MOBILE EQUIPME
NURSE
OFFICE ASSISTA
.
LOPER
OPERASST
1OPER ASST PROD
.
29
24
64
54
16
21
28
22
OPER CHEM PROC
lOPER FIRETRUCK
OPER PROC SERV
OPER STEAM PLT
241
TJJ
1141
181
OPERATOR
132
OPERATOR ASST
14
OPERATORASSISL55J
Y-12 Job Titles
(abbreyiated listing -- jo titles that appeared more than 10 times in CEDR database)
[QPERATOR ASST
—
833
IOPERATORAT
1bPERATORCHEM
12
39
OPERATOR CHEMI
12
OPERATOR CRANE
:
21
OPERATOR EQUIP
19
LOPERATOR MACH
OPERATOR PC
66
82
EOPERATORPP
166
bAWWT
26T
.—ë
OPERATOR TRACK
OPERATORBOILER
OPERATORCHEMIC
bPERATORcONTRO
18
14
949
30
iob
376
[OPERATORMACHIN
OPERATORPROCE$
19
OPERATORPROCESS
24
OPERATORSALVAG
ö1W
EEcAn_
1OUTSIDE MACH
13
OUTSIDE MACHIN
6üiUEAiiF
338
IPAINTER
PAINTERAPPREN
139
16
PARK LIFEGUARD
13
PARTS PROGRAMM
38
PAYROLL ASSIST
PAYROLLSERVIC
12
PHYoiEATr
13
T1 3
PHYSICIAN
J
28
PHYSICIST
fT5
PHYSICIST III
1PHYSICISTASSOC
PHYSICISTHEALT
IPIPEFITTER
1PIPEFITTER APP
PLANNERANDES
20
44
18
778
36
463
!PLANNERMATERIA
47
F
E1ff
9
PLANRANDESTMTR
15
!
tE
ii
PRINTING DESIG
12
FPROCEDURES SPE
24
PROCESS FOREMA
46
IPROCESS FOREMAN
PROCESS OPER
18
66
Y-12 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing.-- job titl that appeaedj more than 10 timesin CEDR database)
PROCESS OPERAT
692
PRODMACHINIST
.
13
PRODUCTION BOl
91
I Oöã
Ti
rPRODUCTIONDIS
. 27T
PRODUCTION OPE
44
PRODUCTION SH.
PROGRAMMERPART
24
rPR0JECT ENGINE
14
37
QUALITYCONTRO
77
R&DGROUPLE
11
TE:5EVEC6W
1Th
RADlOGRAPHER
144
AbTöKEA
T,Ô
RECEIVING AND
198
ECORD CLERK
531
REPAIRMANELECT
12
REPORTSANDDA
174
REPRODUCTION A
17
1EÔiI
40
REQUISITRSTORE
.
A6
12
iiT—i1
1RIGGER
.
75
IGGER&IRONWKR
28
SAFETY SPECIAL
26
[SCHEDULER PROD
IENcETEcHNO
57
1SECRETARY
617
LSECRETARYI
153
SECRETARYIL
'EñiibT
149
60
14
SECTIONSUPV.
SECURITY INSPE
20
14
.19
997
SECURITY OFFIC
[SENIOR ENGINEE
SENIOR TECHNOL
SHEETMETALWO
91
SHEE ¶EtALWb1k
erAV_Tt
SHIFTSUPERINT
f
40
SHIFTSUPERVIS
.
34
SHOP MAINTENAN
I
70
SPEC
152
FSPE
SPEC MACHNE
I
c
17
35
Th
Y-12 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing -- job tit!s that appeared,mor than .10 times in CEDR database)
EpbJö
IPECIALIST DEV
E'IA
IS1CLAUSTMACH
R. ACCOUNTING
61
1SR. CLERICAL A
SR. COMPUTING___
127
17
SR. CONTROLC
.
.
14
SR. DEVELOPMEN
17
SR. DRAFTINGT
85
SR.EDPASSIST
.
40
SR. ENGINEERIN
479
SR. FABRICATIO
.
19
SR. H. P. INSP
.35
SR.H.P.TECH
.
11
!SR.HEALTHPHY
[SR. ILLUSTRATO
.
11
20
rSR. INFORMATIO
15
SR. INSPECTOR
139
SR. LABORATORY
293
SR. MANAGERS
.
14
SR. MATERIALS
74
62
SR. OFFICE ASS
SR. PARTS PROG
.
44
SR. PAYROLLAS,
15
SR. PRODUCTION
.
.
45
R. QUALITY CO
13
SR. RADIOGRAPH .
106
SR. REPORTS AN
SR. REPRODUCTI
66
.
.27
R. SCHEDULER
17
SR. SECRETARY
.
240
SR. STAFFCONS
1STATISTICAL Al
:STATISTICAL AS
1STATISTICIAN
STATISTICIAN I
STEAM PLANTOP
STENOGRAPHER
STOCKKEEPER
.
11
1SR. STAFF ENGI
:SRSTENOGRAPH
19
70
1TôWMAY
42
rSTAFF ENGINEER
202
STATIONARY ENG
310
STATISTASSOC
5
1
1
4
&
77
423
568
134
246
52
STUDENT COOP
STUDENT INTERN
STUDENTTRAINE
23
SUPERASSTLAB
151
1SYfE
Ct- (0
Y-12 Job Tftles
(abbreviated Iiting --job titles that appeared more than 10 times in CEDR database)
'WELDER ____
471
E51TECHNO
tWkWEAiJiib
4
—
C-2
X- 10 Job Titles
. .
X-10 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing -- job titles that appered more than 10 times in CEDR daabase)
347
ACCOUNTANT I
31
ACCOUNTANT II
30
ACCOUNTING ANA
56
ôUTii 6d
ACCOUNTING CLE
60
ACCOUNTING SPE
AWOYFW
10
24
ADJUNCTR&D
12
ADJUNCT RAND
68
ADMINISTRATIVE
210
AIDE ENGINEER_______
45
AIDELABORATORY
80
AIR COND & REF
53
ANAL
31
• ANALYST ACCT
KALVfUf
11
E19
ANALYST LAB
236
ANALYSTTECHRPT
28
ANALYTICAL CHE
29
ANIMAL FAC. WK
97
APP___
79
APPLIED HEALTH
158
ASSIGNMENT SP
70
ASSISTANT BlO
13
ASSISTANT DEV
20
ASSISTANT ENGR
45
ASSISTANT LAB
46
ASSISTANT MATH
19
ASSISTANTTECH____
442
ASSISTANTADMIN
11
77
ASSISTANTBIOLO
1ASSO____
128
rASSOC RESEARCH
IATbr
[ASSOCIATE DESI
ASSOCIATE DEVE
730
To
23
21
66
ASST
23
ASSTADMINISTR
14
1Ac
1ASST BIOLOGY
3
ASST CHEMISTRY
43
33
16
ASST DIV ADMIN
26
ASST ENGINEER
ASSTEXECUflVE.
.24
11
IASSTPUBLICATN
jASST TECHNICAL
.
57
Ef____
X-10 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing -- job titles that appered more than 10 times in CEDR database).
j.CLERK KEYPUNCH
T
31
'CLERK MAIL
1
134
CLERK MATORDER
16
CLERK PROPERTY
19
CLERKRECORD.
13
CLERK REPRO
bLERK REPROD
13
10
28
24
10
•
ERKSTUDENT
CLERK TRAFFIC
t,CLERK TRAVEL
tErsT
LERKACCOUNTIN_____
CLERKWORKORDER
-
50
13
CO OP STUDENT
10
1COMPUTER
ICOMPUTERAPPLI
CbMPUTER MATH
19
38
T2
COMPUTER SYSTE
10
COPVPUTING ANAL_____
309
COMPUTING APPL
98
LCOMPUTING CONS
1
82
COMPUTING SPEC
-
299
1OMPUTINGSYST
COMPUTING TECH
13
73
[COOK
COOP STUDENT_______
16
25
CO-OP STUDENT
roORPORATE FELL____
OfEWA?b
709
21i
DARK ROOM TECH
28
DATA ENTRY CLE
38
DEPT. HD.-AC
14
DEPT. HD. - EN
62
DEPT.HD.-LA
14
LDEPT. HD. - MA
——
29
DEPT. HD. - RE________
14
1b7iTA
DEPT. HD. - TE
12
DEPT. SUPT. -
91
DESIGN ENGINEE
DESIGN SPECIAL
72
42
DESIGN TECHNOL
31
DESIGNER
DEVELOPMENT AS
DEVELOPMENT EN
82
22
786
141
DEVELOPMENT GR
22
DEVELOPMENT SP
79
DEVELOPMENT ST
1062
DIR.-R&DP
87
DIRECTOR -TEC
10
X-1 0 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing --job titles that appered more than 10 times in CEDR database)
IENGINEERPROJEC-
ENGINEERRESEAR
24
47
ENGRASSOC DES
I
65
ENGRASSOCDEV
ENGRASSOCCHEM
ENGR ASST AREA
ENGR ASST PROJ
fEAi
ENGR CHEMICAL
IIENGR HEAD DEV
ENGR RESEARCH
ENGRASS0cDESIG
ENGRASS0CINSTR____
ENVIRONMENTAL
1ESCORT PATROL
346
50
14
42
12
15
14
104
12
14
17
19
EXECUTIVE SECR_____
FIGHTER FIRE
FILE CLERK
17
31
34
FIRE&GUARDL
f5i3A5_____
[FIRE EQUIPMENT______
11
42
10
EFIREPROTECTIO
25
FIRE TRUCK DRI
34
FIREFIGHTER
21
HREMAN
104
FOOD SERVICES
15
E_*
FORE ASST PROC
FFOREASSTCRAFT
FOREELECTMAINT
15
39
14
FOREINSTRMAINT
—
16
FOREMAN CRAFT
113
FOREMAN LABOR
24
FOREMAN MAINT______
39
FOREMAN SHIFT
22
FOREMANJANITOR
16
FOREMANMACHINI
—
12
31
11
FOREMANPROCESS____
28
1GEN. SUPV. - M
GEN.SUPV. -S
GLASSBLOWER
[GRILL MAN
-- •25
14
35
19
10
IGRILLMAN
1GROUP LEADER
GROUP LEADER -
1GUARD
532
H. P. TECHNICI
H. P. TECHNOLO
HANDLERMATERIA
19
40T
m
Cca5
X-10 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing --job titles that appered more than 10 times in CEDR database)
ELPER
90
[HELPER CAFE
wr6E
21
Th
HELPER TRANS
28
HELPERCAFETER!
52
HUMAN RESOURCE
19
FLtDATbW [• T6
ILLUSTRATOR II,
J
23
ILLUSTRATORTR____ 1
22
INDUSTRIAL HYG_____
82
INDUSTRIAL REL
15
.7O
INFORMATION CE____
162
INFORMATION PR
84
[iNFbiMATioNRE46
INSPECTION TEC
12
INSPECTOR
52
INSPECTOR FIRE
26
INSPECTOFHELD
f
31
INSPECTR EQUIP
11
INSTRUMENT TEC
393
INSULATOR
27
INTERVIEWER
18
ISOTOPE DATA C
13
JANITOR
741
JANITOR AND JA
81
JANITRESS
•
36
JUNIOR STUDENT
54
KEY PUNCH I
29
KEYPUNCH II
40
1KEY PUNCH TRAI
•
12
[LAB TECH
13
ThBORATORIAN
120
ABORATORY AID
92
LABORATORY ANA
35
LABORATORY SUP
12
AfbäYT
-1-
öWöW—
1600
ft.ABORER
tLAUNDRYCHECKE
1LAUNDRY WASHER
1
31
16
LEAD PROGRAME
10
T27
LEADER GROUP
56
LEADERENGU'JEER
12
LIBRARIAN
40
LLIBRARIAN ASST
34
LIBRARY SPECIA
13
TTJTTTI TTI
ca-(
X-10 Job titles
(abbreviated listing --job titles thatappered more than 10 times in CEDR database)
MACHINING FORE
11
MACHINIST
HiNISTAPPR____
636
28
MAILASSISTANT_______
19
MAIL CLERK
36
MAINT. FOREMAN
.
AAINTANCEPL
MAKER TOOL
IAKERMECHINSTR
iE[
43
12
18
30
-:
45
1MATERIALS CLER
37
rMATEF,ALs PREP____
—
23
tMATH ASSOCIATE
[iAñ[ASSISTAN______
MATHEMATICIAN
LMATL. ORDER CL
341
32
—
37
93
37
MAIL. REQUISIT
12
MECHANIC
—
iIffo
JMECHANIC ELECT
•
-
10
1MECHANIC INST
IMECHANICINSTR_____
ATWEiI
iEFDiS
33
175
37
34
ERCUTILIT
EbiAcNI_____
.33
19
IMEM
MESSENGER
15
80
METALLASSOC
[METALLURGIST
90
192
MILLWRIGHT
368
tMILLWRIGHT APP
•
30
NUCLEAR REACTO_____
126
NURSE
.
.
7
OFFICE ASSISTA
28
OPER OFF MACH____
2
OPER PWR EQUIP
19
OPER RESEARCH
41
OPERATOR
•
21
148
13
.
97
OPERATOR PILE
85
OPERATOR POWER
53
JOPERATOR REPRO
10
OPERATOR STEAM
•
13
OPERATOR TRUCK
OPERATORcHEMIC
OPERATORLAUNDR
OPERATORREPROD
EJk
11
73
17
12
IOPERSTEAMPOWER___
1OPERSUBSTAIION
tTi9%
X-10 Job Titles
(abbreviated Isting -- job titIs that appered ,rnor than 10 times in CEDR database)
PHOTOGRAPHER
PHOTOGRAPHER A
Thb
-
47
22
1PHY
ii
LPHYS ASSOCHLTH_____
JPHYSASSOCHEALT
25
62
IPHYSICIAN
hHYSICIST
— ,_._4__.
IPHYSICISTASSO
iirntm
44
.40
.
773
17
lot
PHYSICISTASSOC .
248
PHYSICISTHEALT
146
EifrE
T
PIPEFITTER APP_____
IPIPEFITTER HEL
.
21
PLANR ESTMTR
.
PLANT PROTECTI
1POWER_EQUIPMEN
19
10
35
PRAC SCH PART
.
33
PRAC SCHOOL PAR
24
PRACTICE SCHOO
133
PRINCIPAL TECH
51
ffi3515fl Tf4
PRINTING DESIG____
91
PROCESS FOREMA
tPROGRAMASSOC
.
PROGRAM ENGINE
.
PROGRAMMER
ROJET ENGINE
PROJECT MANAGE
.
15
17
12
31
I
•2
PUBLICATION AS
49
Q. A. SPECIALI
.
4
R&DGROUPLE_____
329
R&D PROGRAM MA
14
RADIATION BADG
EREAcTORSHIFr
1RECORD CLERK
jREPORTS AND DA
REPRODUCTIONA
I
.
I
199
54
34
IREPRODUCTIONC
36
EPRODUCTION S
13
RES ASSOC
RESASSOCIII
.
16
16
tETAE è
RESSTMBR
RES STAFF II
.47
74
m
11
RES STAFF MBR
Mer
RESSTAFFMEM
.
25
fTr
LE!(ITôm
X-10 Job Titles
(abbreviated Itjng --job titles th?t apperedre than 10 times in CEDR database)
TTo
RESEARCH ENGIN
64
t
RIGGER
.
32
RIGGERANDIRO_____
.
42
RIGGER&IRONWKR
AWTC'
-
13
:
41
SALAD MAKER
19
SCIENCE TECHNO
217
SCIENTRESEARCH
.
23
SECRETARY
.
1363
SECRETARY I
445
SECRETARY II
263
SECTION HD. -
240
iSECTIONSUPV.
11
1SECURITY INSPE
105
SENIOR COMPUTI
18
JSENIOR DEVELOP
66
.
15
.
55
fSENIOR ENGINEE
1SENIOR RESEARC
LSENIOR TECHNOL
SERVICES COORD
S
.
79
22
SHEETMETALAP_____
20
SHEET METAL WO
52
SHIFT SUPERINT
16
SHIFT SUPERTEN
10
SKILLED LABORE
19
SPEC
.
SPEC BTO LAB
49
SPEC DESIGN
11
SPECIALIST - A
30
SPECIALIST DEV
199
SPECIALISTDESI
J
35
SR LAB TECH
11
SR. ACCOUNTING
64
SR. COMPUTING
27
SR. DEVELOPMEN
.
263
1SR. DRAFTING T
55
1EDPJOBCO____
ISR. ENGINEERIN
11
477
[SR. FABRICATIO
10
1SR. GLASSBLOWE
.
13
To
tSR. H. P. TECH
.
70
}SR. HEALTH PHY
SR. ILLUSTRATO
INIQiS
]
SR. INSPECTOR
.
45j
RPHB
X-10 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing --job titles that appered more than 10 times in CEDR database)
R.PHOTOGRAPH
14
SR. PRINTING D_______
26
SR. R&D PROGRA
18
SR. REPORTSAN_____
27
SR. REPRODUCTI____
27
SR. RESEARCH S.
462
SR. SECRETARY
367
SR. STAFF ENGI —
15
SR. TECHNICAL
:
32
SR. TRAVELASS
14
SSMATERIALSR_____
13
STAFF, ENGINEER_____
81
STAFF RESEARCH
1058
STATISTICIAN
12
STEAM POWER OP
-
96
STENOGRAPHER
118
STORESATTENDA
51
STUDENT
556
STUDENT CLERK
28
STUDENTCOOP
11
STUDENT COOP_______
272
STUDENT INTERN
142
STUDENTTRAINE_____
115
STUDENT TRAINEE
._
11
STUDENTREACTOR
146
SUBSTATION OPE
27
SUMMER CLERICA
UPER ASST LAB
292
22
SUPER CALUTRON
53
SUPER HLTHPHYS
.
18
SUPER LAB DEPT
12
SUPER SHIFT_______
28
SUPER TRAINING
-.
14
SUPERINTENDENT
22
SUPERVISOR
65
SUPERVISOR LAB —
42
SUPERVISORSHIF .
jSUPERVISORYTR
22
27
SUPV
.
40
ISUPV. - ACCOUN
$UPV. -ADMINI
111ET -.
29
27
11
.__1
SUPV. - APPLIE
15
;SUPV. - BUILDI
36
SUPV, - CALUTR
.
. 19
ISUPV, - EDP
!SUPV. - ENGINE
11
30
f1iVTiIE[fir
[SUPV. - INFORM
LYY:
I 9
SUPV. - LABORA
AINTET1_ rn*Aq
cia—b
X-10 Job Titles
(abbreviated listing --job titles that appered more than 10 times in CEDR database)
.
10
UPV. - PHOTOG
T5
hsupv - REACTO
48
1SUPV. - SHOPS
73
rsupv. -TECH.
—
SUPV. - TECHNI
10
64
SUPV. - UTILIT
TECHASST
.
35
22
1TECH HLTH PHYS
'TECH RESEARCH .
75
TECH SCIENCE
.
.
39
TECH WELDING
1fEASISTAW
.
18
172
TECH. ILLUSTRA
15
TECH. REPORTS
66
TECHINSTRUMENT
.
112
• TECHNICAL ASSO
255
TECHNICAL ASST
20
TECHNICAL DIVI
64
TECHNICAL INFO
204
TECHNICAL LIBR_____
67
TECHNICAL PROG
35
TECHNICAL PUBL
-
.
115
TECHNIcAL REPO .
84
TECHNICIAN___
.
30
TECHNICIAN LAB
--
1210
TECHNICIAN MED
36
TECHNICIANENGR____
30
TECHNICIANINST____
38
TIMEKEEPER
•
•
33
TOOLROOM ATTEN
15
TRAINEE
•
•
156
TRAINEE LAB
•
184
rRAiMNGCoOIkD.
•
1TRAVELASSISTA
TRUCK DRIVER
TRUCK DRIVER-
25
37
74
ITYPIST
1678
UTILITY MECHAN
14
1WASHER LAUNDRY
•
ASHER WINDOW -
13
27
WELDER
197
WELDERAPPRENT
•
11
jWELDING TECH NO
•
IWINDOW WASHER
.
56
.14
LYPYThSfPiTUN
.
.70
I I
C-3
Y- 12 and X- 10 Department Names and Numbers
4
Y-12 and X-1O Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
A12J
A12L
A12L
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
A12A
A12A JANITOR DEPT,
-
A12AH
A12A
JANITOR DEPT
A12AH3
A12A
JANITOR DEPT
A12D
A12D
DISPENSARY
A12G
A12G
GUARD DEPT
A12J.
A12L
A12LW
.
EMPLOYEES RELATIONS DEPARTMENT (SERVICE DEPT.)
EMPLOYMENT
EMPLOYMENT
A12M
A12M
MANUFACTURING OFFICE (GENERAL OFFICE)
A12N
A12N
GENERAL MAINT OFFICE/PLANNING & ESTIMATING
A12P
A12P
CENTRAL REPORTS AND INFORMATION OFFICE
A12R
A12R
CAFETERIA AND CANTEENS
A12S
A12S
RECEIVING/STORES AND SHfl'PING
A12T
A12T
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SHOPS
A12W
—
A12W
ENGINEERING DEPT
.
A12WM4
A12W
ENGINEERING DEPT
A13D
A13D
HEALTU PHYSICS
A13J
A13J
SAFETY
A13N
. A13N
GENERAL UTILITIES AND STANDBY
A13S
A13S
TOOL AND CLOTHING DEPT
A13T
A13T
TRANSPORTATION
A13W
A13W
DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING DEPT
A14J
A14J
FIRE DEPARTMENT
A14N
A14N
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT REPAIR AND MAINT DEPT
A15J
A15J.
RECREATION & ATHLETICS(INCLUDING BULLETIN OFFICE)
EXPERIMENTAL PROCESS EQUIPMENT MAINT DEPT -
—________________
A15N
A16J
A15N
A16J
WAGE STANDARDS
A16N
A16N
MAINT SHOPS
A17N
A17N
BUILDING AND GROUNDS MAINT
.
A17NH
A17N
BUILDING AND GROUNDS MAINT
A18N
A18N
MAINTENANCE SALVAGE
A19N
A19N
LAUNDRY
A2ON
.
.
A2ON
FIELD MAINT DEPT
A21N
A21N
MAINT SERVICES
A22J
A22J
TRAINING DEPARTMENT
A23J
A23J
SECURITY DEPARTMENT
.
A24J
A24J
FIRE PREVENTION AND INSPECTION
A5OW
A5OW
PLANT DESIGN DEPARTMENT
B12A
B12A
PLANT SUPERINTENDENT AND DIRECTORS
B 12AM
B12A
PLANT SUPERINTENDENT AND DIRECTORS
B12AM3
B12A
PLANT SUPERINTENDENT AND DIRECTORS
B12C
B12C
CHEMICAL DEPT (BUSINESS)
BI2H
B12H.
REFINING DEPT
B12H
B12H
REFINING DEPT
B12HM1
- -
B12H
—
REFINING DEPT
B12L
B12L
ANALYTICAL LABORATORY
B12LH
B12L
ANALYTICAL LABORATORY
B13L
B13L
ASSAY LABORATORY
B13W
B13W
SALES AND USE TAX
FI12D
H12D
CHEMICAL DEVELOPMENT
.
H12E
H12E
PROCESS DEVELOPMENT DEPT
.
C3-l
Y-12 and X-1O Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENTNAME
H12EM4
H12E
PROCESS DEVELOPMENT DEPT
H12L
H12L
ISOTOPE DEVELOPMENT DEPT
,H12L43
H12L
ISOTOPE DEVELOPMENT DEPT
•
M12B
M12B
REFINING DIVISION GENERAL
M12C
M12C
CHEMICAL DIVISION GENERAL
M12M
M12M . MATERIAL CONTROL-PRODUCT
M12P
M12P
PRODUCT CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT
.
.
.
.
M12PH
M12P
PRODUCT CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT
M12S
M12S
BOILER ROOM.
M12W
M12W
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
M13B
M13B
REFINING DEPT
.
M13BM1
M13B
REFINING DEPT
M13C
'M13C
CHEMICAL RECYCLE/BUILDING 9206
M13P
M13P
PRODUCT PROCESSING DEPARTMENT
.
M 14C
M14C
CHEMICAL RECYCLE/BUILDINGS 9211/9928
M15C.
M15C
CHEMICAL RECYCLE/BUILDING 9204-3
M15CH
M15C
CHEMICAL RECYCLE/BUILDING 9204-3
M15P
M15P
CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT
M15PH
M15P
CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT
2001
2001
BUILDING SERVICES
2001H
2001
. BUILDING SERVICES
200101
2001
BUILDING SERVICES
2002
2002
MAINT PROCESS
2003
2003
MAINT SHOPS
2005
2005
MAINT UTILITIES
.
2006
2006
MAINT SALVAGE
2008
2008
TRANSPORTATION
2009
2009
MAINT AUTOMOTIVE EQUIPMENT(NORMAL)
2011
2011
HEAVY EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE
2014
2014
BLDG.,GRDS.,& MAINT.SHOPS DEPT.
2014N
2014
BLDG.,GRDS.,& MAINT.SHOPS DEPT..
2015
2015
FIELD MAINT
2017
2017
MAINT & UTIL ADMIN
2018
2018
RESEARCH SERVICES DEPT
2026
2026
ADP MAINT (ALLOY DEVELOPMENT P
MAINT)
2033
2033
UNKNOWN
2036
2036
PRODUCTION CONTROL
2037
2037
N.M. SFG. SHIP. & STORAGE
2040
•
2040
UNKNOWN
2041
2041
INDUSTRIAL SAFETY
2043
2043
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
2044
2044 — MECHANICAL INSPECTION D.EPT
.
2045
—
2045
UNKNOWN
2046
2046
PLANT RECORDS
2048
2048
PUBLIC & TECHNICAL INFORMATION
.
2049
.
2049
GRAPHIC ARTS
2050
2050
SAFETY ANALYSIS
2051
2051. ENGINEERING RECORDS
2055
2055
SPECIAL MECHANICAL PRODUCTION DEPT
2056
2056
LIGHTING MAINTENANCE
2057
2057
FACILITIES ENGINEERING
Y-12 andX-10 Dept. Numbers arid Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
2058
2058
MAINTENANCE SERVICES
2059
2059
PROCESS ANALYSIS DEPT
2060
2060
PLANT ENGINEERING
2063
2063
MAINT BUILDINGS
2064
2064
ENGINEERING DEVELOPMENT
2065
2065
ENGINEERING MECHANTCS DEPT
2066
2066
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL ENGINEERING
2067
2067
CIVIL & ARCHITECTURAL ENGINEERING DEPT
2068
2068
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING DEPT
2069
2069
INSTRUMENT ENGINEERING DEPT
2070
2070
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING DEPT
2071
2071
REVISED TO 2704 ACCOUNT-SAME DESCRIPTION
2073
2073
ENGINEERING ANALYSIS
2077
2077 — ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS DEPT
2083
—
2083
FIXED FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
2085
2085
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS DEPT
2087
2087
PUBUCATIONS
2089
2089
INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE
2090
2090
HEALTH CENTER
*
—
2091
2091
GUARD DEPT
2093
2093
FIRE
2094
2094
SECURITY
2095
2095
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
2096
2096
LAUNDRY
2097
2097
RECREATION AND ATHLETICS
2098
2098
LABOR RELATIONS
2099
2099
PUBLICATIONS
-
2100
2100
CLERICAL POOL
2101
2101
INSURANCE DEPT
2102
2102
EMPLOYMENT
2103
——
2103
INBOUND MOVING EXPENSES
2106
2106
BENEFIT PLANS
2107
2107
CAFETERIA AND CANTEENS
210700
2107
CAFETERIA AND CANTEENS
2108
2108
CLERICAL POOL
2109
2109
EMPLOYEES RELATIONS DEPT(SERVICE DEPT)
2110
2110
PERSONNEL DIVISION ADMIN
2115
2115
SALARY ADMINISTRATION
•
•
2116
2116
UNKNOWN
2125
2125
MEAL ALLOWANCE
2128
2128
NON-OCCUPATIONAL DISABILITY
2130
——
2130
NATIONAL GUARD-RESERVE TRAINING
2132
2132
FM&S DIVISION ADMIN
2133
2133
MANUFACTURING OFFICE(GENERAL OFFICE)
2134
2134
OFFICE SERVICES DEPARTMENT
2135
2135
CASHIER AND TRAVEL OFFICE
2136
2136
TRAFFIC
•
2137
2137
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
2139
2139
TIMEKEEPING
2140
2140
PROPERTY DEPT
2141
2141
MAIL
Y-12 and X-10 Dept. Numbers anJ Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
2142
2142
STORES
2143
2143 RECIVING
2144
.2144
TOOL..
.
.
2145
2145
MATERIALS DELIVERY SERVICE.
2146
2146 PLANT RECORDS
2147
2147 DATA SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT H
2148
2148
REPRODUCTION
2149
2149
ENGINEERING.SERVICES
2150
2150
UNKNOWN
.
2151
2151
MATERIAL CONTROL
2157
2157
ACCOUNTING AND BUDGET
2158
2158
AREA 5 MAINTENANCE DEPT
2159
2159
Y-12 PROPERTY SALES
2160
2160
. MATERIAL ENGINEERING DEPT
2161
2161
PRODUCTION SERVICES
2162
2162
CRITICAL PATH & REGULAR PRODUCTION SCHEDULING
2163
.
2163
QUALITY CONTROL
2164
2164
PLANT TOOLING COORDINATION.
2165
2165
PRODUCTION COORDINATION
2171
2171
DATA SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
2177
2177
CIM PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
2178
2178
CAD/CAM SYSTEMS
2182
2182
. GENERAL WELD SHOP
2183
2183
GENERAL CAN FABRICATION SHOP
2184
2184
GENERAL SHOP INSPECTION
2185
2185
GENERAL FIELD SHOP
2186
2186
GENERAL METAL FABRICATION SHOP
2187
-
2187
GENERAL FOUNDRY
2188
. 2188
GENERAL EXPEDITING & AUXILIARY SERVICES
2189
2189
GENERAL ESTIMATING & PLANNING
2190
2190
RAILROAD FACILITY
2200
—
2201
2200
PLANT MANAGERS DEPARTMENT
-
2201
CAPITAL ASSETS MANAGEMENT
2204
2204
PLANT PROTECTION DEPARTMENT
2205
2205
SAFEGUARDS ENGINEERING
2206
2206
PROTECTION FORCES TRAINING
22.10
2210
SAFEGUARDS & SECURITY ADMIN
2213
2213
PROD ENG CONFIG CNTRL & STAFF
2214
2214
MATERIAL PLANNING AND PROCUREMENT
.
2216
2216
SSCONTROL
2230
2230
PRODUCT ANALYSIS
2231
2231
SPECIAL TESTING
2233
2233
ALPHA-5 PRODUCTION & INSPECTION
2252
. 2252
ANALYTICAL LABORATORY DEPT
.
2257
—
-
2257
PRODUCTION ASSAY
2259
2259
ALLOY ASSAY LAB
2260
2260
LABORATORY OPERATIONS
2262
2262
METHODS EVALUATION GROUP
2270
2270
TECHNICAL SERVICE LABORATORY
2282
2282
ANALYTICAL LABORATORY
2283
2283 IASSAY LABORATORY
Y-12 and X-10 Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
NO
DEFT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
2300
CHEMICAL RESEARCH
öi30l
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
2302
COLEX & PRODUCT FINISHING DEVELOPMENT
2303
ANALYTICAL DEVELOPMENT DEPT
2304
ATOMIC LASER ISOTOPE SEPARATION
2320
2320
PROCESS RESEARCH
PROCESS RESEARCH
2342.
CERAMICS & PLASTICS DEVELOPMENT
2343
MATERIALS ENGINEERING DEVELOPMENT
2344
METALLURGICAL DEVELOPMENT
.
2345
LABORATORY DEVELOPMENT
2346
CHEMISTRY DEVELOPMENT
2347
FABRICATION SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
2350
TECHNICAL ADMINISTRATION
.
2351
CRITICALITY STUDIES
., 2352
COMPUTER SYSTEMS DEPARTMENT
2353
OPERATIONS ANALYSIS AND LONG RANGE PLANNING
2354
HSEA ADMINISTRATION
2355
CERTIFICATION SYSTEM
2356
DATA PROCESSING
2357 . DATA SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
2358
STATISTICAL SERVICES & SS CONTROL
2359
NM ACCOUNTABILITY
2360
ISOTOPE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
2360
ISOTOPE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
. .
2361
ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS
GENERAL SHOP INSPECTION
—
2363
2366
2366
HEALTH PHYSICS
2367
2367
TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICES DEPARTMENT
2371
2371
-
PT - WELD INSPECTION
2373
2373
CRITICALITY SAFETY
2374
2374
QUALITY ASSURANCE INSPECTION
2375
.
2375
DI- DIRECT OPERATIONS
2376
2376
PHYSICAL TESTING
2377
2377
LABORATORY OPERATIONS
2378
2378
PRODUCTION ASSAY
2379
2379
PRODUCTION ANALYSIS
.
.
2380
2380
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS LAB
2381
2381
STANDARDS & CALIBRATION.
2382
2382
QIS/SAMPLING PLOAN ADMIN
2383
2383
QUALITY ASSURANCE
—
2384
2384
—
QUALITY ENGINEERING
.
2385
2385
PRIDE IN EXCELLENCE PROGRAM
2386
2386
PHYSICAL TESTING OPERATION
2387
2387
PRODUCTION RADIATION TESTING
.
.
2388
2388
MATERIALS TESTING SUPPORT
2389
2389
NON DESTRUCTIVE TESTING
.
2390
2390
ENGINEERING TEST SYSTEM
.
2399
2399
UNKNOWN
.
2410
2410
Y-12 PLANT ENGINEERING DIVISION
.
2450
2450
LONG RANGE PLANNING
C3-5
Y-12 and X-1O Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
DEPT NO
'DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
2457
2457
FACILITIES ENGINEERING
2459
2459 PLANNING & ANALYSIS
.
2460
. 2460
ENGINEERING DIVISION
2463
2463
MECHANICAL DESIGN ENGINEERING
2465
2466
2465' ENGINEERING MECHANICS
.
2466
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL ENGINEERI4G
2467
$
2467
CIVIL AND ARCHITECTURAL ENGINEERING
2468
2468
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
2469
2469
INSTRUMENT ENGINEERING.
2470
2470
TOOL DESIGN
2471
— NUMERIAL CONTROL ENGINEERING
2471
2472
2472
-
MECHANICAL MANUFACTURING DESIGN
2473
2473
ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS DESIGN
2600
-
2600-- EQUIPMENT SERVICES
2601
-
2601
GENERAL EXPEDITING
—
2602
2602
NUCLEAR DIVISION MICROGRAPHICS
2603
2603
GENERAL SHOP INSPECTION
2604
2604
UNKNOWN
2605
2605
GENERAL METAL FABRICATION SHOP
2606
2606
GENERAL FOUNDRY
2607
2607
GENERAL EXPEDITING & AUXILIARY SERVICES
2608
2608
EURI & EUCFM ADMINISTRATION
2610
2610
CAP EQUIP &DIV STAFF ENGR
2611
2611
STANDBY PLANT MAINT
2616
2616
BUILDING UTILITIES OPERATIONS
-
•
2617
2617
CHEMICAL SERVICES
URANIUM CHIP RECOVERY
—- -____
.
--
2618
2618
2618M
2618
URANIUM CHIP RECOVERY
..
.
2619
2619
ALPHA-5 PROCESSING
2619H
2619
ALPHA-S PROCESSING
2624
2624
FABRICATION DIV ADMIN
2625
-
2625
SPECIAL SERVICES
2628
2628
CASTING
9766 MACHINE SHOP-EDP 060
—
2629
2629
2633
2633
MECHANICAL INSPECTION
.
2635
2635
RADIATION SAFETY
2636
2636
ORNL CHEMICAL SERVICE DEPT.
2637
2637
ALPHA-S EAST SHOP
2638
2638
ALPHA-5 WEST SHOP
2640
.
2640
ALPHA-S NORTH SHOP
-
2643
2643 - METHODS EVALUATION GROUP
2644
--
2644
PHYSICAL TESTING
- 2645
—-
2645
FABRICATION DIV ENGINEERING -
2646
2646
LABORATORY OPERATIONS-REVISED 7/68 TO 2377 ACCOUNT
2647
2647
PRODUCTION ASSAY
2648
2648
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
2650
2650
PLANT UTILITIES OPER - STAFF
-.
2651
2651
PLANT UTILITIES OPERATIONS
2652
2654
2652
FILTER SERVICE
.
2654
UTILITIES ADMINISTRATION
2662
2662
SAFEGUARDS STAFF
C3-b
Y-12 and X-10 Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
2663
CENTRAL TRAINING FACILITY
2664
MATERIAL SPECIMEN SHOP
.2665
UNKNOWN
2668
(2668-100) CHEMICAL PORODUCTION PROCESSING
2681
ALLOY LABORATORY
2682
ALPHA-4 CASCADE
2683
ALPHA-5 CASCADE
.
.
2683.
ALPHA-5 CASCADE
.
2685
ALPHA-S CASCADE OPERATION
.
, I
2686
BIO FACILITIES ENGINEERING
.
2687
BETA-2 DEPT
.
'2689
BETA-2 CHEMISTRY
2690
ALLOY DIVISION (2681/2682/2683/2686)
.
.
.
2691
KAPPA FACILITY
.
2692
POTASSIUM SEPARATION
. 2694
MATERIALS FORMING
2695
MATERIALS SHOP
ALPHA-4 STRIPPING
.
.
.
2697
2699
2699
GENERAL ESTIMATING & PLANNING DEPT
2700
2700
GRAPHITE SHOP .
2701
2701
ASSEMBLY
2702
2702
H-i FOUNDRY
2703
2703
A WING
2704
2704
B831W84 PROGRAMS
.
—
2705
2705
ADMINISTRATION
.
--____________________
2707
2707
ASSY DIVISION ADMIN
,
2708
2708
W88 PROGRAM
2710
2710
PROG SCHED AND WEAP MATL MGMT
11
2711
ASSEMBLY ENGINEERING
2712
2712
ALPHA-5 ASSEMBLY AREA
2713
27t3
EQUALITY EVALUATION
2714
.2714
BETA-4 ASSEMBLY
2716
2716
W89 PROGRAM
2718
2718
MACHINING
2720
2720
BETA-4 FORMING
2722
2722
BETA-4 ASSEMBLY
2723
2723
BETA-2 ASSEMBLY
2724
2724
COMP. OPERATIONS
.
2726
2726
BETA-2 EXPANSION ASSEMBLY
2732
2732
GENERAL CAN FABRICATION SHOP
2736
2736
SPECIAL PRODUCTION MACHINING
2737
2737
ARGON GAS-CYLINDERS
2739
2739
URANIUM CONTROL DEPT
2742
2742
TOOL GRINDING
.
2743
.
2743
STEAM PLANT
.
2760
2760
GAGE CERTIFICATION LABORATORY-EDP 060
2762
2762
QUALITY LIAISON
.
2763
2763
REVISED TO 2383 ACCOUNT
2770
2770
TOOLING-PROCURED NO DATE GIVEN
2772
2772
TOOLING-FABRICATED NO DATE GIVEN
.
2773
2773
G3. PROCESSING (NOT VALID FOR PERIOD OF LAB OPERATIONS)
Y-12 and X-10 Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO'DEPARTMENTNAME
2776
2776
E/M/C - WING & 9206 SHOPS
2790
2790
UNKNOWN
2791
2791
MECHANIcL OPERATIONS DEPT
2792
2792
EXCESS ACCOUNTS'
2793
2793 .
9215 ROLLING.
'
.
'
2794
2794
DOEORO '
'
'
'
'
.
.
2795
,
2795
SCRAP
.
2799
2799
SAMPLES
.
2800
2800
CONTAINERS RETURNABLE..
2900
2900
PROPERTY ACCOUNT - GENERAL
.
4320
4320
ELECTRONUCLEAR RESEARCH
4370
4370
CHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY
4435
4435
ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY -DIV. GEN.
'
4455
4455
BIOLOGY
•
4460
-
•
'4460
FUSION ENERGY DIVISION - GEN.
6130
6130
GENEARL ACCOUNTING DIV. ADM.
6140
6140
CENTRAL ACCOUNTING SERVICES DEPARTMENT
6142
6142
CENTRAL COMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENT
6160
6160
CENTRAL DATA PROCESSING-ADMINISTRATION
6161
6161
COMPUTER SERVICES DEPARTMENT
MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DEPARTMENT
COMMERCIAL PROGRAMMING DEPARTMENT
6167
6167
6169
6169
'
'
6190
6190
. PURCHASING.DIVISION
6385
,
6385
OPERATING CONTRACTORS PROJECT OFFICE
6410
.
6410
ENGINEERING ORGDP
-
7110
7110
EXECUTIVE OFFICES
7111
7111
PUBLIC RELATIONS
—
7112 '
7112
INDUSTRIAL COOPERATION OFFICE
.
7113
. 7113
UNKNOWN
7120
7120 — GENERAL INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS DIVISION ADMINISTRATION
7124
7124
CENTRAL EMPLOYMENT DEPT.
7125
. 7125
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS
7130
'
7130
UNKNOWN
7139
7139
UNKNOWN
7140
7140
EXECUTIVE OFFICES WORD PROCESSING CENTER
7142
7142
UNKNOWN
7146
7146
UNKNOWN
7150
7150
LAW DEPARTMENT
7155
7155
N D SAFEGUARDS ADM.
7160
7160
UNKNOWN
7161
7161
OPERATIONS-Y-12
7162
7162
DATA ENTRY -Y-12 SITE.
7164
7164
PROGRAM CONTROL - Y-12 SITE
7165
T 7165
JOB CONTROL - Y-12 SITE
.
.
7167
7167
UNKNOWN
7168
7168
COMPUTER SYSTEMS SUPPORT - Y-12
7169
7169
INFORMATION SYSTEMS - Y-12
7170
7170
TECHNICAL APPLICATIONS - Y-12 SITE
7191
7191
UNKNOWN
7193
7193
UNKNOWN
7301
7301
UNKNOWN
C3-
Y-12 and X-10 Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
7360
7360
-
UNKNOWN
S
7385
7385
OPERATING CONTRACTORS ROJECT OFFICE
7390
7390
OFFICE OF QUALITY ASSURANCE
7410
7410
ENGINEERING-Y-12
7601
7601
OFFICE OF WASTE ISOLATION
7603
7603
UNKNOWN
7701
•
7702
7701
7702
qNKN0WN
UNKNOWN
•
7703
7703
UNKNOWN
8169
8169
INFORMATION SYSTEMS - X-10
—
8410
ENGINEERING - ORNL
•
8170
8170
TECHNICAL APPLICATIONS X-1O
IiI41o
A5OD
-
A5OD
MEDICAL
-
A5OE
A5OE
INSTRUMENT DEPARTMENT
A500
A500
GUARDS
A5OH
A5OH'
HEALTH PHYSICS DEPARTMENT
A5OK
A5OK
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
A5OL
A5OL
EMPLOYMENT
A5OM
A5OM
GENERAL OFFICES
A5OMW
A5OM
GENERALOFFICES
A5ON
A5ON
EXCLUSIVE OF A5OE, A5OT, A51T
50N
A5ON
MECHANICAL MAINTENANCE (EXCLUSIVE OF
A5OE,A5OT,A51T)
A5ONH
A5ON
EXCLUSIVE OF A5OE, A5OT, A51T
A5OR
A5OR
CAFETERIA
A5OS
A5OS
STORES
A5OT
A5OT
TRANSPORTATION
A5OW
A5OW
PLANT DESIGN DEPARTMENT
A51G
A51G
GUARD DEPARTMENT
51G
A51G
GUARD DEPARTMENT
A51H
-
A51H
HEALTH PHYSICS DEPARTMENT - INSTRUMENT SERVICES
A51J
A51J
RECREATION AND ATHLETICS
A51L
A51L
INBOUND MOVING EXPENSES
A51S
•
A51S
RECEIVING AND SHIPPING
A51T
A51T
MAINTENANCE AUTOMOTIVE EQUIPMENT (NORMAL)
A51W
A51W
NEW FACILITIES DESIGN
051W
A51W
RESEARCH ENGINEERING - SHOPS
A52G
A52G
FIRE DEPARTMENT
A52H
A52H
HEALTH PHYSICS DEPARTMENT - PERSONNEL MONITORING
A52J
A52J
—
LAUNDRY
A52L
A52L
INBOUNDPER DIEM
-—
A52S
-
A52S
TOOL DEPARTMENT
A52W
A52W
RESEARCH ENGINEERING - DESIGN
A53G
-
A530
SAFETY
A53H
•
A53H
HEALTH PHYSICS DEPARTMENT - SURVEY GROUP
A53J
•
A53J
TRAINING AND SPECIALIZED SERVICES
A56J
A56J
OCCUPATIONAL DISABILITY
—
A6OH
A6011
UNKNOWN - PROBABLYHEALTH PHYSICS DEPT.
A6OJ
A6OJ
OUTBOUND MOVING EXPENSE
A6OL
A6OL
UNKNOWN
-
C3-I
Y-12 and X-1O Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
A6ON
A6ON
RESEARCH SHOPS
A63J
A63J
LABOR RELATIONS
A64J
A64J
PHOTOGRAPHY
A65J
A65J
TRAINING DEPARTMENT
A66J
A66J
INSURANCE DEPARTMENT
B5OA
B5OA
DIRECTOR'S DEPARTMENT
B50L
B5OL
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS
B52A
B52A
WAGE STANDARDS
D
D
UNKNOWN
',,
G
G
UNKNOWN
HH
HH—
UNKNOWN
H100
H100L
LIBRARIES
LIBRARIES
H100L
-
H100L
-
H200
—
H200L
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - PHYSICS
H200L
H200L
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - PHYSICS,
H300
H300L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT-CHEM DIV
11300L
H300L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT-CHEM DIV
H300LM
H300L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT-CHEM DIV
400L
H400L
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - TECHNICAL,
H400L
H400L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT-TECHNICAL
400
H400L
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - TECHNICAL
H400
H400L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT-TECHNICAL
50L
H5OL
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OVERHEAD
H500L
H500L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT - POWER PILE
H500
H500L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT - POWER PILE
-
500L
-
H500L
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - POWER•
H600
H600L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT -BIOLOGY
H700
-
H700L- RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT -METALLURGY
H700L
H700L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT -METALLURGY
H800
H800L
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT -TRAINING
H900
H900L
-
TECHNICAL HEALTH PHYSICS DIVISION
M5OC
M5OC
CHEMICAL OPERATION - 706-D AREA
M5OD
M5OD
ISOTOPE DEVELOPMENT
M5OE
M5OE
ISOTOPE CONTROL DEPARTMENT
M5OK
M5OK
ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
M5OP
M5OP
PILE OPERATIONS - 100 AREA
M5OS
MSOS
BOILER ROOM
50S
M5OS
STEAM PLANT
•
M5OT
M5OT
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
M56P
M56P
MISC. IRRADIATION UNITS (REQUIRIING CHEM. PROC.)
1
1 —
PILE OPERATIONS - 100 AREA
-
10 •
10
RECEIVING AND SHIPPING
11
11
GENERAL OFFICES
11
•
11
GENERAL OFFICES
12
..2
EMPLOYEES SERVICES
12
12
EMPLOYEES SERVICES
13
13
GUARD DEPARTMENT
14
14
FIRE P1.OTECTION
14
14
FIRE PROTECTION
15
15
CAFETERIA
•
15
•
15
CAFETERIA
C'3-10
Y-12 and X-10 Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
,
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
16
16
LAUNDRY
17
17
JANITqR DEPARTMENT
17
17
JANITOR DEPARTMENT
18
18
POWE1. DEPT(EXCLUSIVE OF M5OT,M5OS)
18
18
POWER DEPT(EXCLUSIVE OF M5cfl,M5OS)
19
19
PLANT DESIGN DEPARTMENT
—.
19
19
PLANT DESIGN DEPARTMENT
2
'
2
CHEMICAL OPERATIONS 706D AREA
2
2
CHEMICAL OPERATIONS .706D AREA
20
20
MECHANICAL MAINTENANCE (EXCLUSIVE OF
A5OE,A5OT,A51T)
20W
20
MECHANICAL MAINTENANCE (EXCLUSIVE OF
A5OE,A5OT,A51T)
,
,
20
20
MECHANICAL MAINTENANCE (EXCLUSIVE OF
A50E,A50T,A51T
—
21
21
MAINTENANCE - AUTOMOTIVE EQUIPMENT
•
21W
21
MAINTENANCE - AUTOMOTIVE EQUIPMENT
21
21
MAINTENANCE - AUTOMOTIVE EQUIPMENT
22
22M
22
22
MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT - INSTRUMENT
MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT - INSTRUMENT
22
22
MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT - INSTRUMENT
23
23
MEDICAL DEPARTMENT
23
23
MEDICAL DEPARTMENT
023M
23
MEDICAL DEPARTMENT
23W —
23
MEDICAL DEPARTMENT
-____
25
25
HEALTH PHYSICS DEPARTMENT
26
-
26
HEALTH PHYSICS DEPARTMENT -INSTRUMENT SE1WICES
27
27
HEALTH PHYSICS DEPARTMENT -PERSONNEL MONITORING
28
28
HEALTH PHYSICS DEPARTMENT -SURVEY GROUP
29
29
MAINTENENCE - BUILDINGS
3M
3
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - CHEMISTRY
3W
3
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - CHEMISTRY
3
3
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - CHEMISTRY
3
3
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - CHEMISTRY
3001
3001
JANITOR
3003
3003
FIELD ENGINEERING
3004
3004
MECH SHOPS GROUP
3006
3006
SALVAGE & RECLAMATION
3008
3008H
3008
TRANSPORTATION
TRANSPORTATION
3008
3009
3009
MAINT AUTO EQUIP
3011
3011
MAINT HEAVY EQUIP
3015
3015
CENTRAL MECHANICAL SHOPS
•
3016
• 3016
CENTRAL MACHINE SHOP
F & M DIVISION ADMN
—_______________
3017
3017
3019
3019
MAINTENANCE PLANNING
-
3020 •
3020
MAINT PLANNING
3021
3021
GE&CDIVADMN
3032
3032
BURIAL GROUND
3040
3040
LAB PROTECTION ADM
3041
3041
SAFETY
C3-II
Y-12 and X-10 Dept. r4umbers and Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTh[ENT NAME
3043
3043
FIRE PROTECT EQUIP INSPECT &CQNTROL
3045
3045
SS MATERIAL MANAGEMENT
3046
3046
LABORATORY RECORDS
3047
3047
LIBRARIES
S
3048
•
3048
TECHNICAL UTILIZATION/COMMERCIALIZATION
3049
3049
SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS
,
3050
3050
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS
3051
3051
LABORATORY RECORDS
3052
3052
PERSONNEL SAFETY
•,.,
,.
3057
3057
UNKNOWN
3058
3058
UNKNOWN
3059
•
3059
I AND C CONTROLS ADMIN
3060
3060
DESIGN ENGINEERING
3061
3061
APPRENTICE PROGRAM
3062
3062
MAINT GROUNDS
3062H
3062
MAINT GROUNDS
3063
3063
MAINTENANCE BUILDINGS
3065
3065
NEW FAC DESIGN
3066
3066
I AND C ENGINEERING CONTROLS
3067
3067
I AND C ENGINEE1ING SECTION B
.
3068
3068
I AND C ENGINEERING SECTION A
3070
3070.
I & C MAINTENANCE - ADMINISTRATION
3071
.
3071
I AND C MAINTENANCE SECTION B
.
3072
3072
GRAPHIC ARTS
3073
3073
I AND C MAINTENANCE SECTION A
3074
3074
UNKNOWN
3075
3075
CONTROLS
3077
3077.
ELECTRICAL SERVICES
3078
3078
FIELD SERVICES
3079
3079
RESEARCH SEkVICES DEPARTMENT WEST
3080
-
3080
.
RESEARCH SERVICES DEPARTMENT SOUTH
3081
3081
FIELD SERVICES DEPARTMENT
3081H
3081
FIELD SERVICES DEPARTMENT
3082
3082
EXCEPTIONAL SUMMER STUDENTS
3085
3085
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
3086
3086
PLANNING & STANDARDS
.
3087
3087
MIT PRACTICE SCHOOL PARTICIPANT
3088
3088
INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE
3089
3089
CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING
3090
3090 .
HEALTH
3091
3091
GRARD
309111.
3091
GRARD
3092
3092
OPERATIONS ANALYSIS
3093
3093
FIRE
3094
3094
-
SECURITY
S.
-
-__________________________
3095
,
3095
APPRENTICESHIP TRAINING
3096
3096
DECONTAMINATION LAUNDRY
3097
3097
HOUSING
3098
3098
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
3099
3099
LAB NEWS
3100
.
3100
EMPLOYEE RECORDS
.
C3- (-
Y-12 and X-1O Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPAR1MENT NAME
3101
3101
INSURANCE
3102
3102
EMPLOYMENT
3107
3107
CAFETERIA,
3109
'' 3109
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
3112
3112. QRNL PHOTOGRAPHY
3113.
'3113
PATROL
.
3113H
3113
PATROL
3115
3115
COMPENSATION
3116
3116
HOUSING
.
3117
. 3117
ASSIGNMENT GROUP
3118
-
3118
SEMINARS AND CONFERENCES —
3133
3133
F & M ADMINISTRATION
-
3135
135
SPECIAL TRAVEL AND PERSONNEL SERVICES
3136 .
3136
TRAFFIC
3137
3137
CASHIER & TRAVEL
. .
3139
.
3139,,
TIMEKEEPING
,
3140
3140
PROPERTY
3 140W
3140
PROPERTY
3141
3141
MAIL
.
3142
3142
STORES
3143
3143
RECEIVING
3144
3144
TOOL DEPARTMENT
3148
3148
ORNL REPRODUCTIONS
3151
—
3151
MATERIAL CONTROL
3151W
3151
MATERIAL CONTROL
3152
3153
3152
ORACLE DATA PROC & PROGR
3153
EQUIPMENT POOL
3160
.
3160
ACCOUNTING
—
3162
3162
BUDGET & PROGRAM PLANNING
3165
'
3165
BUDGET
3166
31.66
COMPUTER SERVICES
'
3167
.
3167
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS PORGRAMMING
3169
.
.
3169
UNKNOWN
3171
3171
TECHINFOGENADMN
3172
3172
NUCLEAR DATA
3173
3173
PUBLIC INFORMATION
.
—..
.
—
3173M
3173
PUBLIC INFORMATION
3180
3180
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
3181
318i
UNKNOWN -,
3191
-
3191
APPL HEALTH PHYSICS
—
3192
3192
PERSONNEL METERS
3193
-
3193 -
RADIATION SURVEY
3194
—
3194
DOSIMETRY RECORDS & PROCEDURES
3195
3195
AREA MONITORING
3196
'
'3196
HEALTH PHYSICS INSTRUMENTS
3197
3197
LABORATORY ASSAYS GROUP
3198
3198'
FOREST MGMT OF 0 R RESERVATION PROPERTIES
3200
3200
DIRECTOR'S
.
3200M
3200
DIRECTOR'S
3201
3201
RADIATION SAFETY & CONTROL
3202
3202
SHIFT SUPERINTENDENT
C313
Y-12 and X-10 Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
.
. —
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
3203
3203
CENTRAL MANAGEMENT -SPECIAL, PROJECTS
3234
3234
INSPECTION ENGINEERING
3236
3236
QUALITY ASSURANCE
3290
3290
ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY
3295
3295
WAGE STANDARDS
33
33
LIBRARIES
33
33
LIBRARIES
3315
3315
CIVIL DEFENSE
.
.
3320
3320
ELECTRONUCLEAR
3325
.3325
HFIR PREOPERATIONS
3340
3340
ASSOCIATE DIRECTORS DEPARTMENT
3341
—
3341
—
INSTR & CONTROLS
3342
3342
UNKNOWN
3344
3344
UNKNOWN
3345
3345
ENERGY DIVISION
3350
3350
MATHEMATICS
3355
3355
INFORMATION DIVISION - RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
3360
3360
ISOTOPE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
3361
3361
ISOTOPES ENGINEERING
3363
3363
RADIOISOTOPE TECHNOLOGY
3365
3365
ISOTOPE TRNG & INFORMATION
3369
3369.
ISOTOPES TARGET PREPARATION R & D
3370
3370
CHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY
3375
3375 .
FUEL RECYCLE
3380
3380
AIRCRAFT REACTOR EXPER
3390
3390
ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY
.
3405
3405
PHYSICS
3410
3410.
NEUTRON PHYSICS
.
—
3420
3420
CHEMISTRY
CHEMISTRY
—___________________
3420M
3420
-
3430
3430
REACTOR CHEMISTRY
—.
3435
3435
HOMOGENEOUS REACTOR EXP
3450
3450
UNKNOWN
3455
3455
BIOLOGY
3460
3460
UNKNOWN
—
3470
.
3470
METALLURGY
-
S
3475
.
3475
SOLID STATE
3477
3477
MOLECULAR ANATOMY PROGRAM
-
3480
3480
EDUCATION
3481
3481
SCHOOL OF REACTOR TECH
3482
—
3482
RES PART PROG HP & BIOL
RES PART PROG SC & ENGR
.
3483
3483
3490
3490
ASS'T TO DIVISION DIRECTOR
—
35
35
MAINTENANCE - GROUNDS
3530
3530
BILLED EXPENSE TO OTHER THAN AEC AGENCIES
.
36
36
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT -POWER PILE
36
36
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - POWER PILE
3601
3601
ISOTOPES ADMINISTRATION
3602
3602
RADIOISOTOPES
3603
3603
UNKNOWN
3604
3604
ISOTOPE RESEARCH MATERIALS LAB
C3-14
Y-12 and X-1O Dept. NurnLerand Dept. Names
DEPT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
3605
3605
ISOTOPES SALES DEPARTMENT
3607
3607
UNKNOWN
3612H
3612
ELEC DISTR SYSTEM
3612
3612
ELEC DISTR SYSTEM
3613
3613
UNKNOWN
3614
3614
ISOTOPES DIVISION ADM
3615
3615
SF MATERIAL CONTROL
3630
3630
CHEMICAL OPERATION - 706-D AREA
3632
3632
LIQUID & GASEOUS WASTE DISPOSAL
3634
3634
EQUIPMENT DECONTAMINATION
3636
3636
BULK SHIELDING REACTOR OPRS
3638
3638
ISOTOPE DEVELOPMENT
3639
3639
OAK RIDGE RESEARCH REACTOR
3640
3640
ISOTOPE CONTROL
3641
3641
PILE OPERATIONS
3642
3642
LOW INTENSITY TEST REACTOR
3643
3643
IODINE ISOTOPES
3648
3648
TREATED WATER DISTR SYSTEM
3649
3649
DEMINERALIZED WATER PLANT
3650
3650
RADIOISOTOPE PROCESSING
3657
3657
UNKNOWN
3671
3671
LABORATORY FACILITIES
3674
3674
HOT CELL OPERATIONS
3675
3675
SOLID STATE DIVISION - TARGET PREPARATION
3725
3725
AIR COMPRESSOR
3743
3743
BOILER ROOM
39
39
-
39
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT -TRAINING
39
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT -TkAINING
3900
3900
PROPERTY ACCOUNT - GENERAL
4
4
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - PHYSICS
004M
4
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - PHYSICS
40
40
(COST ACCT. FOR ENGINEERING & MECHANICAL)
40
40
(COST ACCT. FOR ENGINEERING & MECHANICAL)
4021
4021
BUILDING MAINT ORNL AT Y12
4047
4047
LIBRARIES
DIVISION PUBLICATIONS OFFICE
4099
4099
41
41
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT -.METALLURGY
41
41
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - METALLURGY
4112
-
4112
ORNL Y12 PHOTOGRAPHY
—-_________
4163
4163
STATISTICAL SERVICES —
4192
4192
Y12PERSMONTR
4193
4193
ORNL Y12 HP RAD SURVEY
42
42
RESEARCH ENGINEERING - SHOPS
42
42
RESEARCH ENGINEERING - SHOPS
42W
42W
RESEARCH ENGINEERING - SHOPS
4270
4270
ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY
4290
4290
ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY
43
43
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OVERHEAD
43
43
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OVERHEAD
4300
4300
MATERIALS CHEMISTRY
-
4320
4320
ELECTRONUCLEAR RESEARCH
C'3-'t5
Y-12 and X-1O Dept. Numbers and Dept. Names
DEFT NO
DEPT NO DEPARTMENT NAME
4325
4325
SEPARATIONS TECHNOLOGY
4341
4341
UNKNOWN
4342
4342
UNKNOWN .
4345
4345
ENERGY DIVISION AT Y-12
4355
4355
INFORMATION DIVISION - RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
4360
4360
STABLE ISOTOPE RES & PROD
4360M
4360
STABLE ISOTOPE RES & PROD
4362
$
4362
SPCIAL SEPARATIONS
4364
4364
THERMAL DIFFUSION R & D
4370
1
4370
CHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY
4380
1
4380
AIRCRAFT REACTOR ENGR
4390
-
4390
ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY
44
44 - RESEARCH ENGINEERING - DESIGN
44
44
RESEARCH ENGINEERING - DESIGN
4405
4405
PHYSICS
4420
4420
CHEMISTRY
4430
4430
REACTOR CHEMISTRY
4435
4435
ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY - DIV. GEN.
4455
4455
BIOLOGY
4456
4456
UNKNOWN
4460
4460
FUSION ENERGY DIVISION - GEN.
4490
4490
Y12 H P RESEARCH
45
45
TOOL DEPARTMENT
—
4602
4602
86-INCH CYCLOTRON OPERATIONS
4603
4603.
EM STABLE ISOTOPES
4647
4647
STABLE ISOTOPES
4650
4650
ELECTROMAGNETIC SEP
5
5
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - TECHNICAL
5
5
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - TECHNICAL
SW
-
5
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - TECHNICAL
6
6
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - BIOLOGY
6W
6
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - BIOLOGY
6
6
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - BIOLOGY
7
7
DIRECTOR'S DEPARTMENT
GENERAL OFFICES
8
8
8
8
GENERAL OFFICES
008W
8
GENERAL OFFICES
8160
—
8160
COMPUTER SCIENCES DIVISION -ADM
8161
8161
OPERATIONS - ORNL
8162
8162
DATA ENTRY - X-10 SITE
-
8163
8163
— MATH AND STATICS RESEARCH
-
8165
8165
JOB CONTROL - X-10 SITE
—-
8168
8168
COMPUTER SYSTEMS SUPPORT -X-1O
8169
8169
INFORMATION SYSTEMS - X-10
—
8170
8170
TECHNICAL APPLICATIONS - X-10
8410
8410
ENGINEERING - ORNL
9
9
PURCHASING DEPARTMENT
C3-I'o
C-4
X- 10 Department Names, Department Numbers, and Division Names
, I
1127/1948 
1 
Pile Operations - 100 Area 
1/27/1948 
18 
Power Department (Exclusive of M5OS,M5OT 
- 
1/27/1948 
18 
Steam Plant 
• 
- 
• 1/27/1948 
4 
Research & Development - Physics Div. 
• 
) 
) 
;....... ) 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
1 /27/1948 
2 
Chemical Operations, 706D Area 
706-D 
10/24/1947 
2 
Production Special 
706-A 
10/24/1947 
3 
Chemistry 
,. 
- 
1/27/1948 
3 
Research & Development - Chemistry Div 
. 
735-B 
10/24/1947 
4 
Physics 
. 
1/27/1948 
5 
Research & Development Technical Div 
-. 
- 
- 
- 
703-A 
10/24/1947 
5 
Technical 
719-A 
10/24/1947 
6 
Biology 
1/27/1948 
6 
Research & Development - Biology Div 
- 
735-B 
10/24/1947 
7 
Administrative 
- 
1/27/1948 
7 
Superintendents Department 
. 
703-C 
10/24/1947 
8 
Accounting 
- 
1/27/1948 
8 
General Offices 
- 
703-C 
10/24/1947 
9 
Purchasing & Traffic 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
9 
Purchasing Department 
1/27/1948 
10 
Receiving and Shipping Department 
713-A 
10/24/1947 
10 
Storehouse 
1/27/1948 
10 
Stores Department 
1/27/1948 
11 
General Offices 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
12 
Employee Services 
1/27/1948 
12 
Employment & Personnel 
- - 
- 
703-C 
10/24/1947 
12 
Personnel 
- 
1/27/1948 
13 
Guard Department 
703-C 
10/24/1947 
13 
Security & Protection 
1/27/1948 
14 
Fire Protection 
720 
10/24/1947 
14 
Safety & Fire Protection 
735-A 
10/24/1947 
14 
Safety & Fire Protection 
- 
1/27/1948 
14 
Safety Department 
1/27/1948 
15 
Cafeteria 
708 
10/24/1947 
15 
Cafeteria 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
16 
Laundry 
723 
10/24/1947 
16 
Laundry 
- 
703-C 
10/24/1947 
17 
General Services 
1/27/1948 
17 
Janitors bepartment 
- 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
105 
10/24/1947 
1 
Pile Operations 
. 
. 
0 
. 
1/27/1948 
36 
Research & Development - Power Pile Div 
. 
) 
) 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
1/27/1948 
19 
Plant Design Deparmient 
703-B 
10/24/1947 
19 
Plant Engr. & Design 
. 
717-J 
10/24/1947 
20 
Mechacal 
1/27/1948 
20 
Mechanical Maintenance (ExA5OE,A5OT,A51T 
- 
1/27/1948 
21 
- 
Maintenance - Automotive Equipment 
717-F 
10124/1947 
21 
Transportation 
. 
1/27/1948 
21 
Transportation (Exclusive of A51T) 
-- 
717-B 
10/24/1947 
22 
Instruments 
• 
1/27/1948 
22 
Mechanical Department - Instruments 
. 
719 
10/24/1947 
23 
General Medical 
1/27/1948 
23 
Medical Department 
1/27/1948 
24 
HealthPhysicsDept.TJrinalysis (CostCenter 
7 19-A 
10/24/1947 
25 
Health Physics 
1/27/1948 
25 
Health Physics Department 
1/27/1948 
26 
Health Physics Department-Instrument Ser 
1/27/1948 
27 
Health Physics Department-Personnel Mom 
. 
703-A 
10/24/1947 
36 
Power Pile 
- 
1!27/1948 
40 
Construction and Design (CostCenter) 
703-A 
10/24/1947 
41 
Metallurgy 
- - 
1/27/1948 
41 
Research & Development-Metallurgy 
. 
1/27/1948 
42 
Research Engineering - Shops 
- 
717-BB 
10/24/1947 
42 
Research Shop 
. 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
1 Division # 
801 
10/24/1947 
18 
Steam Power & Water Treatment 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
18 
Water Treating 
. 
1/27/1948 
37 
Isotope Separation (CostCenter) 
1/27/1948 
38 
Pile Operations - Isotopes (CostCenter) 
1/27/1948 
39 
Research & Development-Training Div. 
735-B 
10/24/1947 
39 
- 
Training School 
1/27/1948 
39 
Training-Industrial Relations 
- 
1/27/1948 
28 
Health Physics Department-Survey Group 
1/27/1948 
29 
Maintenance - Buildings 
1/27/1948 
30 
General Plant (CostCenter) 
. 
1/27/1948 
31 
Tank Farm Area (CostCenter) 
__________ 
1/27/1948 
32 
Radium and Beryllium (CostCenter) 
1/27/1948 
33 
Libraries 
- 
735-B 
10/24/1947 
33 
Library 
1/27/1948 
34 
Charges to AEC (CostCenter) 
1/27/1948 
35 
Maintenance-Grounds 
- 
- 
) 
X-1 0 Department, BuildiAg, Division Listing 
7/14/1949 
3009 
Maintenance-Automotive Equipment(Normal) 
- 
1/27/1948 
48 
Hot Pilot Plant (CostCenter) 
. 
. 
1/27/1948 
62 
Freight, Express and Cartage (CostCenter 
1/27/1948 
63 
Compens. ,Pub.Liabil. ,Soc.Sec.Tax(CostCtr 
1/27/1948 
64 
Non-occupational Disability (CostCenter) 
1/27/1948 
64 
Occupational Disability Payments(CostCtr 
- - 
1/2711948 
70 
Employee Plans (CostCenter) 
- 
1/27/1948 
71 
Inventory Adjustment (CostCenter) 
. 
. 
1/27/1948 
76 
-Tennessee Sales & Use Tax (CostCenter) 
- 
. 
1/27/1948 
46 
Chemical Analysis (CostCenter) 
1/27/1948 
47 
Isotope Development 
. 
- 
. 
1/27/1948 
53 
Compens.,Pub.Liabil.,Soc.Sec.Tax(CostCtr 
, 
- - - 
- 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3006 
Salvage & Reclamation 
Engineering & Mechanical 
-_________ 
7/14/1949 
3008 
Transportation 
- 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3008 
Transportation 
Engineering & Maintenance 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3008 
Transportation 
Engineering & Mechanical 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3009 
Maint. Auto. Equip. 
Engineering & Maintenance 
- 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3009 
Maint. Auto. Equip. 
- 
Engineering & Mechanical 
- 
7/14/ 1949 
3001 
Janitors Department 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3001 
Janitors 
Industrial Relations 
- 
3026 
4/30/1964 
3001 
Janitors 
Operations 
3026 
8/31/1970 
3001 
Janitors 
Operations 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3001 
Janitors 
Operations 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3001 
- 
- 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3001 
Operations (Services) 
28 
- 
7/14/1949 
3003 
Mechanical Department-Maintenance &Shops 
- 
- 
- 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3003 
Mechanical 
Engineering & Maintenance 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3003 
Program Engineering 
Engineering & Mechanical 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3003 
Field Engineering 
Plant & Equipment 
- 
2518 
8/31/1970 
3003 
Field Engineering 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3003 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3003 
Plant & Equipment 
- 
21 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3004 
Mech Shops Group 
Engineering & Mechanical 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3006 
Salvage & Reclamation 
Engineering & Maintenance 
1/27/1948 
43 
Research & Development-Overhead 
. 
703-A 
10/24/1947 
43 
Research Administration 
1/27/1948 
44 
Research Engineering-Design 
703-B 
10/24/1947 
44 
Research Engr. & Design 
1/27/1948 
45 
Tool Department 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
) 
) 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3020 
Maint. Planning 
Plant & Equipment 
. 
1000 
8/31/1970 
3021 
G. E. Admn. 
Gen. Eng. 
1€00 
4/30/1964 
3021 
G. E. & C. Div. Admn. 
Gen. Engr. &Cónstr. 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3017 
P & E Division Admn. 
Plant & Equipment 
. 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3019 
Programmed Maint. 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
8/31/1970 
3019 
Programmed Maint. 
Plant & Equipment 
- 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3019 
Plant& Equipment 
- 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3024 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3032 
Burial Ground 
Engineering & Mechanical 
- 
1000 
7002 
4/30/1964 
8/31/1970 
3032 
3032 
Burial Ground 
Solid Waste Storage 
- 
Plant & Equipment 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3015 
Plant& Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3015 
Plant&Equipment 
21 
7/14/1949 
3016 
Research Shops Department 
- 
3024 
5/1/1953 
3016 
Research Shops 
Engineering & Maintenance 
-- 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3016 
Fabrication 
Engineering & Mechanical 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3016 
Fabrication 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
8/31/1970 
3016 
Fabrication 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3016 
- 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3016 
Plant& Equipment 
21 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3017 
E&M Division Admn. 
Engineering & Mechanical 
2518 
8/31/1970 
3017 
P & E Division Admn. 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3017 
Plant& Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3017 
Plant& Equipment 
21 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3019 
Plant&Equipment 
21 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3009 
Maint. Auto. Equip. 
Plant & Equipment 
7002 
8/31/1970 
3009 
Maint. Auto. Equip. 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3009 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3009 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3011 
Maint. Heavy Equipment 
Engineering & Maintenance 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3011 
Maint. Heavy Equip. 
Engineering & Mechanical 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3011 
Maint. Heavy Equip. 
Plant & Equipment 
7002 
8/31/1970 
3011 
Maint. Heavy Equip. 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3011 
. 
Plant&Equipment 
- 21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3011 
Plant&Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3014 
Plant& Equipment 
21 
3026 
4/30/1964 
3015 
Field Maintenance 
Operations 
. 
3026 
8/31/1970 
3015 
Field Maintenance 
Operations 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3015 
Field Maintenance 
Operations 
- 
7/14/1949 
3060 
Engineering Department 
- 
- 
) 
) 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
1000 
8/31/1970 
3060 
Design Engineering 
Gen. Eng. 
- 
3500 
1/1/1993 
3059 
Instr. & Controls (Services) 
- 
34 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3060 
Engineering 
Engineering & Majntenance 
- 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3060 
Planning & Design 
Engineering &-Mechanical 
- 
- 
4500S 
813 1/1970 
3050 
Technical Publications 
Technical Information 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3048 
Information 
31 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3049 
Information 
31 
2068 
5/1/1953 
3050 
Technical Publications 
Information & Reports 
2068 
4/30/1960 
3050 
Technical Publications 
Technical Information 
- 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3050 
Technical Publications 
Technical Information 
- 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3050 
Information 
31 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3051 
Central Files 
Information & Reports 
3500 
12/31/1981 
3059 
- Instr. & Controls (Services) 
34 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3041 
Safety 
App!. Health Physics & Safety 
2517 
5/1/1953 
3041 
Safety 
Laboratory Protection 
2517 
4/30/1960 
3041 
Safety 
Laboratory Protection 
2517 
4/30/1964 
3041 
Safety 
Laboratory Protection 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3041 
Industrial Safety & App!. Health Physics 
36 
5000 
8/31/1970 
3043 
Fire Prot. Equip. Insp. & Control 
Laboratory Protection 
5000 
1/1/1993 
3043 
Laboratory Protection 
26 
5000 
12/31/1981 
3045 
Laboratory Protection 
26 
5000 
1/1/1993 
3045 
Laboratory Protection 
26 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3046 
Laboratory Records 
Technical Information 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3046 
Laboratory Records 
Technical Infonnation 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3046 
Laboratory Records 
Technical Information 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3046 
Information 
31 
7/14/1949 
3047 
Libraries 
. 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3047 
Libraries 
Research Director 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3047 
Libraries 
Technical Information 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3047 
Libraries 
Technical Information 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3047 
Libraries 
- 
Technical Information 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3047 
Information 
31 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division I 
5000 
4/30/1960 
3040 
Lab. Protection - Admn 
Laboratory Protection 
5000 
4/30/1964 
3040 
Lab. Protection - Admn 
Laboratory Protection 
5000 
8/31/1970 
3040 
Lab. Protection - Admn. 
Laboratory Protection 
5000 
12/31/1981 
3040 
Laboratory Protection 
26 
5000 
1/1/1993 
3040 
Laboratory Protection 
- 
26 
7/14/1949 
3041 
Safety Department 
- 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
7/14/1949 
3075 
Instrument Department 
- 
- 
. 
• 
7/14/1949 
3065 
New Facilities Design 
- - 
: 
3022 
. 4/30/1960 
3078 
Field Services 
- 
Engineering & Mechanical 
- 
3500 
12/31/1981 
3073 
Instr. & Controls (Services) 
34 
3500 
5/1/1953 
3075 
Instrumentation & Controls 
Instr. & Contr. 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3075 
Instrumentation & Controls 
Instr. & Contr. 
. 
3500 
4/30/1960 
3075 
Controls 
Instr. & Controls 
- 
3500 
4/30/1964 
3075 
Controls 
Instr. & Controls 
3500 
8/31/1970 
3075 
Controls 
Instr. & Controls 
3500 
4/30/1960 
3075 
Instrument 
Instr. & Controls 
3500 
4/30/1964 
3075 
Instrument 
Instr. & Controls 
3500 
8/31/1970 
3075 
Instrument 
Instr. & Controls 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3077 
Electrical Services 
. 
Engineering & Mechanical 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3077 
Plant Services 
- 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
8/31/1970 
3077 
Plant Services 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3077 
- 
Plant & Equipment 
21 - 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3077 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
3500 
.12/31/1981 
3066 
Instr. & Controls (Services) 
34 
- 
3500 
12/31/1981 
3067 
Instr. & Controls (Services) 
. 
34 - 
3500 
12/31/1981 
3068 
- 
. 
- 
Instr. & Controls (Services) 
. 
. 
34 
3500 
12/31/1981 
3070 
Instr. & Controls (Services) 
. 
34 
3500 
1/1/1993 
3070 
Instr. & Controls (Services) 
34 -- 
3500 
12/31/1981 
3071 
Instr. & Controls (Services) 
34 
2068 
4/30/1960 
3072 
Graphic Arts 
- 
Technical Information 
. 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3072 
Graphic Arts 
. 
Technical Information 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3072 
Graphic Arts 
- 
Technical Information 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3072 
Information 
31 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3060 
Design Engineering 
Gen. Engr. & Constr. 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3061 
. 
Plant& Equipment 
21 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3062 
Maint. Roads & Grounds 
Engineering & Maintenance 
. 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3062 
Maintenance Grounds 
Engineering & Mechanical 
7002 
8/31/1970 
3062 
Maintenance - Grounds 
Plant &Equipment 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3062 
Maintenance Grounds 
Plant & Equipment 
. 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3062 
Plant & Equipment 
-. 
21 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3063 
Maintenance-Buildings 
Engineering & Maintenance 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3063 
Maintenance Buildings 
Engineering & Mechanical 
- - 
- 
2518 
8/31/1970 
3063 
Maintenance - Buildings 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3063 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3063 
- 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
) 
) 
) 
X1O Department, Building, Division Listing 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3078 
Research Services 
Plant & Equipment 
3502 
8/31/1970 
3078 
Research Services - East 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3078 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3078 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
3104 
8/31/1970 
3079 
Research Services - West 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3079 
. 
- 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
307 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
7910 
8/31/1970 
3080 
Research Services - South 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3080 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3080 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
7002 
8/31/1970 
3081 
Field Services 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3081 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3081 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3082 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3085 
Personnel Administration 
Personnel 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3085 
Personnel Administration 
Personnel 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3085 
Personnel Admn. 
Personnel 
. 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3085 
Employee Relations 
29 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3085 
Human Resources 
29 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3086 
Planning & Standards 
Engineering & Mechanical 
3550 
8/31/1970 
3088 
Industrial Hygiene 
Health 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3088 
Industrial Hygiene 
Health 
3550 
12/31/1981 
3088 
Health 
- 
23 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3089 
Controls 
- 
Engineering& Mechanical 
1000 
8/31/1970 
3089 
Construction Engineering 
Gen. Eng. 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3089 
Construction Eàgineering 
Gen. Engr. & Constr. 
7/14/1949 
3090 
Health Division 
- 
2013 
5/1/1953 
3090 
- 
Health 
Health 
- 
2013 
4/30/1960 
3090 
Health 
Health 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3090 
Health 
- 
Health 
- 
- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3090 
Health 
Health 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3090 
Health 
21 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3090 
• 
Health 
23 
7/14/1949 
3091 
Laboratory Protection 
- 
2500 
5/1/1953 
3091 
Guard 
Laboratory Protection 
2500 
4/30/1960 
3091 
Guard 
Lab&atory Protection 
- 
2500 
4/30/1964 
3091 
Guard 
- 
Laboratory Protection 
2500 
8/31/1970 
3091 
Guard 
. 
Laboratory Protection 
- 
. 
5000 
12/31/1981 
3091 
Laboratory Protection 
26 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
- 
V 
- 
-• 
- 
28 
V 
- 
- 
Personnel 
- 
X-10 Depament, BuiId, Division Listing 
Laboratory Protection 
1/1/1993 
3094 
- 
Protection 
26 
7/14/1949 
3095 
Employee Training Department 
26 
- 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3092 
Industrial Engineering 
Laboratory 
Plant 
26 
2518 
8131/1970 
3092 
Operations Analysis 
Equipment 
2518 
12/31/1981 
3092 
Plant & Equipment 
7/14/1949 
3093 
Fire Department 
Plant & Equipment 
- 
21 
. 
2500 
5/1/1953 
— 
3093 
Fire 
Laboratory Protection 
2500 
413011960 
3093 
Fire 
Laboratory Protection 
2500 
4/30/1964 
— 
3093 
Fire 
Protection 
2500 
5000 
8/31/1970 
3093 
Fire 
Laboratory 
Protection 
12/31/1981 
3093 
. 
- 
Protection 
- 
- 
5000 
1/1/1993 
3093 
- 
26 
5000 
5/1/1953 
3094 
Security 
Laboratory 
Laboratory Protection 
26 
5000 
4/30/1960 
3094 
Security 
Protection 
- 
5000 
4/30/1964 
3094 
Security 
Laboratory Protection 
- 
5000 
8/31/1970 
3094 
Security 
Protection 
. 
• 
5000 
5000 
12/31/1981 
3094 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3095 
Employee Training 
Industrial Relations 
Personnel 
2517 
8/31/1970 
3095 
Method Studies 
Persomiel 
V 
V 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3095 
Method Studies 
Personnel 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3095 
Training & Methods 
Personnel 
7/14/1949 
3096 
Laundry 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3096 
Laundry 
- 
Industrial Relations 
V_________ 
V 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3095 
Personnel Development 
Personnel 
2517 
8/31/1970 
3095 
Personnel Development & Systems 
Personnel 
_________ 
2517 
8/31/1970 
3095 
Staff Conf. Orientation 
Personnel 
V 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3095 
Staff Conf., Orientation 
Personnel 
2517 
8/31/1970 
3095 
Standard Practice Proc. 
Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3095 
Standard Practice Proc. 
- 
3026 
4/30/1964 
3096 
Decontamination Laundry 
Operations 
3026 
8/31/1970 
3096 
Decontamination Laundry 
2517 
8/31/1970 
3095 
Apprenticeship Training 
Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3095 
Apprenticeship Training 
Personnel 
.2517 
8/31/1970 
3095 
Educational Assistance 
Personnel 
V 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3095 
- 
Educational Assistance 
- 
- 
Operations 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3096 
Decontamination Laundry 
Operations 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3096 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3096 
Operations (Services) 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division 
5000 
1/1/1993 
3091 
Division # 
- 
• 
7/14/1949 
3109 
Service Department 
- 
) 
X-10 Department, ) 
Building, Division Listing 
- 
Personnel 
7/14/1949 
3101 
Insurance Section 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3101 
Insurance 
Industrial Relations 
- 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3101 
Insurance 
Personnel 
- 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3101 
Insurance 
Personnel 
450014 
8/31/1970 
3101 
Insurance 
Personnel 
7/14/1949 
3102 
Personnel & Employment Department 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3102 
- 
Employment 
- 
Industrial Relations 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3102 
- 
Employment 
Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3102 
Employment 
- 
Personnel 
- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3102 
- 
Employment 
Personnel 
7/14/1949 
3107 
Cafeteria & Canteens 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3107 
- 
Cafeteria & Canteens 
Industrial Relations 
2010 
4/30/1960 
3107 
Cafeteria 
Personnel 
2010 
4/30/1964 
3107 
Cafeteria & Canteen 
Personnel 
2010 
8/31/1970 
3107 
Cafeteria & Canteens 
Personnel . 
- 
450014 
12/31/1981 
3107 
Employee Relations 
29 
450014 
1/1/1993 
3107 
. 
Human Resources 
29 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
7/14/1949 
3097 
Recreation & Athletics 
- 
— 1000 
5/1/1953 
3097 
Recreat. & Athletics 
- 
Industrial Relations 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3097 
Housing 
Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3097 
Housing 
Personnel 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3097 
Recreation 
Personnel 
4500 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3097 
Recreation 
Personnel 
8/31/1970 
3097 
Recreation 
- 
- 
Personnel 
7/14/1949 
3098 
Labor Relations Department 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3098 
Employee Relations 
Industrial Relations 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3098 
Employee Relations 
Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3098 
Labor Relations 
Personnel 
450014 
8/31/1970 
3098 
Labor Relations 
Personnel 
2068 
4/30/1960 
3099 
LAB. News 
Public Information 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3099 
Laboratory News 
Public Information 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3099 
Laboratory News 
Public Information 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3099 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3099 
Information 
31- 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3100 
Personnel Services 
Industrial Relations 
. 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3100 
Personnel Records 
Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3100 
Personnel Records 
Personnel 
- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3100 
Personnel Records 
) 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3112 
- 
Information 
31 
7/14/1949 
3113 
Patrol Department 
. 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3115 
Wage & Salary 
Industrial Relations 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3115 
Compensation 
Personnel 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3115 
Wage Standards 
Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3115 
Wage Standards 
Personnel 
1000 
- 5/1/1953 
3116 
Housing 
Industrial Relations 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3117 
Stenographic Pool 
Industrial Relations 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3117 
Assignment Group 
Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3117 
Assignment Group 
Personnel 
. 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3117 
Assignment Group 
Personnel 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3117 
Housing 
Personnel 
. 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3118 
Conferences 
Personnel 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3118 
Finanace & Materials 
- 
37 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3118 
Finance & Business Management 
37 
. 
7/14/1949 
3133 
General Office 
. 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3133 
F & M Administration 
Finance & Materials 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3133 
F & M Administration 
Finance & Materials 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3133 
General Office 
General Office 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3133 
Finanace & Materials 
37 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3135 
Special Travel 
- 
Personnel 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3136 
Traffic 
Finance & Materials 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3136 
Traffic 
Finance & Materials 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3136 
Traffic 
- 
Personnel 
- 
- 
- 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3136 
Finanace & Materials. 
37 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3136 
. 
Finance & Business Management 
37. 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3137 
Cashier & Travel 
Finance & Materials 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3137 
Cashier & Travel 
. 
- 
Finance & Materials 
. 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3137 
Cashier & Travel 
. 
Personnel 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3137 
Teletype 
Personnel 
- 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3137 
. 
. 
Finanace & Materials 
• 
37 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3137 
. 
. 
. 
. 
- 
Finance & Business Management 
- 
37 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3139 
Timekeeping & Paymaster 
. 
Finance & Materials 
- 
7/14/1949 
3112 
Photography 
2068 
4/30/1960 
3112 
Photography 
Technical Information 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3112 
Photography 
Technical Information 
4500NA 
8/31/1970 
3112 
Photography 
Technical Information 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3109 
Employee Relations 
Personnel 
- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3109 
Employee Relations 
Personnel 
- 
-: 
- 
- 
General Office 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
- 
Finance & Materials 
-_- 
4500 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3142 
Stores 
Finance & Materials 
- 
5/1/1953 
3142 
Stores 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3141 
Finanace & Materials 
- 
37 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3141 
Finance & Business Management 
- 
37 
7/14/1949 
3142 
Stores Section 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3142 
Stores 
Building mate 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3139 
Timekeeping & Paymaster 
Finance & Materials 
2506 
8/31/1970 
3139 
Timekeeping & Paymaster 
Personnel 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3139 
. 
Finanace & Materials 
37 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3140 
Property Accounting 
Budget & Prog. Office 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3140 
Property Accounting 
Budget & 
Office 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3140 
Property 
- 
Finance & Materials 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3140 
Property 
General Office 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3141 
Mail 
Finance & Materials 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3141 
Mail 
Finance & Materials 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3141 
Mail 
Personnel 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3142 
- 
Stores 
Plant & 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3142 
Finanace & Materials 
31-S 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3142 
Finance & Business Management 
37 
7/14/1949 
3143 
Receiving and Shipping Section 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3143 
Receiving 
Finance & Materials 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3143 
Receiving & Shipping 
Finance & Materials 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3143 
Receiving & Shipping 
General Office 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3143 
Receiving & Shipping 
Plant & Equipment 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3143 
Finanace & Materials 
37 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3143 
Finance & Business Management 
37 
7/14/1949 
3144 
Tool Section 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3144 
- 
Tools 
Finance & Materials 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3144 
Tools 
Finance & Materials 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3144 
Tool Section 
General Office 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3144 
Tools 
Plant & Equipment 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3144 
Finanace & Materials 
37 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3148 
Reproduction 
Information & Reports - 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3148 
Reproduction 
- 
Technical Information 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3148 
Reproduction 
Technical Information 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3148 
Reproduction 
Technical Information 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3148 
- 
Information 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3151 
Material Control 
Finance & Materials 
31 - - 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3151 
Material Services 
- 
Finance & Materials 
. 
- 
Finance & Materials 
- 
. 
. 
- 
- 
. 
Health Physics 
- 
) 
) 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3153 
Equipment Pool 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3151. 
. 
Finanace & Materials 
37 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3151 
. 
Finance & Business Management 
37 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3152 
Oracle Data Proc. & Progr. 
Math. Panel 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3153 
- 
Equipment Pool 
- 
Finance & Materials 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3153 
Equipment Pool 
Plant & Equipment 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3160 
2001 
4/30/1960 
3191 
Appl. Health Physics 
. 
Health Physics 
4500S 
. 
4/30/1964 
. 
3191 
AppI. Health Physics 
Accounting 
. 
Budget & Prog. Office 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3160 
Accounting 
Budget & Prog. Planning Office 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3161 
Finance & Business Management 
37 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3162 
Budget & Program Planning 
Budget & Prog. Office 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3162 
Budget & Program Planning 
Budget & Prog. Planning Office 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3162 
Finanace & Materials 
37 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3162 
Finance & Business Management 
37 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3165 
Budget 
Budget & Prog. Office 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3165 
. 
Budget 
Budget & Prog. Planning Office 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3165 
Budget 
Finance & Materials 
. 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3165 
Finanace & Materials 
37 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3165 
. 
Finance & Business Management 
37 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3166 
Computer Services 
Mathematics 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3166 
Computer Services 
Mathematics 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3167 
Numerical Analysis Program 
Mathematics 
- 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3167 
Numerical Analysis Programming 
- 
. 
Mathematics 
- 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3171 
Tech. Info. Gen. Admn 
Technical Information 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3171 
Tech. Infor. Gen. Admn. 
Technical Information 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3171 
Tech. Infor. Gen. Admn. 
Technical Information 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3171 
. 
- 
Information 
31 - 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3172 
Nuclear Data 
Technical Information 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3173 
Public Infonnation 
- 
Public Information 
- 
- 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3173 
Public Information 
Public Information 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3173 
Public Information 
Public Information 
4500S 
1/1/1993 
3175 
- 
Office of Radiation Protection 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3180 
Sewage Disposal System 
- 
Operations 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3185 
Off, of Env. Compl. & Documentation 
35 
- 
7/14/1949 
3191 
Radiation Survey-Monitoring (General) 
. 
- 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3191 
AppI. Health Physics 
AppI. Health Physics & Safety 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
1000 
5/1/1953 
3151 
Material Control 
General Office- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3151 
Material Services 
Plant & Equipment 
- 
. 
- 
. 
Industrial Safety & Appl. Health Physics 
) 
X-1O Department, Building, Division Listing 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3192 
. 
Industrial Safety & AppI. Health Physics 
36 
7/14/1949 
3193 
Radiation Survey 
- 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3193 
Radiation Survey 
Appl. Health Physics & Safety 
- 
2001 
5/1/1953 
3193 
Radiation Survey 
Health Physics 
2001 
4500S 
4/30/1960 
4/30/1964 
3193 
3193 
Radiation Survey 
Radiation Survey 
Health Physics 
Health Physics - 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3193 
. 
Industrial Safety & App!. Health Physics 
36 
7/14/1949 
3194 
Instrument & Assay Group 
- 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3194 
Dosimetry Records & Proced. 
Appl. Health Physics & Safety 
- 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3194 
Dosimetry, Records & Procedures 
- 
Health Physics 
- 
- 
2001 
5/1/1953 
3194 
Instr. & Assay Group 
Health Physics 
2001 
4/30/1960 
3194 
Instr. & Assay Group 
Health Physics 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3194 
Industrial Safety & AppI. Health Physics 
36 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3195 
Environmental Monitoring 
AppI. Health Phyics-& Safety 
2001 
5/1/1953 
3195 
- 
Area Monitoring 
Health Physics 
2001 
4/30/1960 
3195 
Area Monitoring 
ffealth Physics 
- 
- 
4500S 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
12/31/1981 
3195 
3195 
Environmental Monitoring 
Health Physics 
- 
36 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3196 
Health Physics Technology 
Health Physics 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3196 
Health Physics Technology 
Health Physics 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3196 
Industrial Safety & App!. Health Physics 
36 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3197 
Laboratory Assays Group. 
App!. Health Physics & Safety 
- 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3197 
Laboratory Assays Group 
Health Physics 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3198 
Forest Mgmt. of 0. R. Reservation Proper 
Health Physics 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3198 
Industrial Safety & AppI. Health Physics 
36 
7/14/1949 
3200 
Director's Department 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3200 
Director's 
. 
Director 
- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3200 
Director's 
Director 
3001 
5/1/1953 
3200 
Laboratory Shift Supervisor 
- 
Director 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3200 
Staff 
Director 
9204-1 
4/30/1964 
3200 
Y-12 Coordinator 
- 
Director 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
2001 
5/1/1953 
3191 
Radiation Survey - Montr. 
Health Physics 
4500S 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
1/1/1993 
3191 
3191 
Industrial Safety & Appi. Health Physics 
Off, of Safety & Health Protection 
36 
36 
7/14/1949 
3192 
Personnel Monitoring 
4500S 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
4/30/1964 
3192 
3192 
Personnel Meters Group 
Personnel Meters Group 
AppI. Health Physics & Safety 
Health Physics 
2001 
5/1/1953 
3192 
Personnel Monitoring 
Health Physics 
2001 
4/30/1960 
3192 
Personnel Monitoring 
Health Physics 
. 
) 
) 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3201- 
- 
Office of Oper. Readiness & Fac. Safety 
22 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3201 
Industrial Safety & App!. Health Physics 
36 
5000 
8/31/1970 
3202 
Shift Supt. 
Assistant Director Services 
5000 
4/30/1964 
3202 
Shift Superintendent 
Lab. Services Supt. 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3202 
Special Services 
Lab. Services Supt. 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3202 
Central Management 
20 
5000 
1/1/1993 
3202 
Laboratory Protection 
26 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3203 
Central Management 
20 
5000 
1/1/1993 
3205 
Laboratory Protection 
26 
2024 
1/1/1993 
3229 
Off. of Quality Progs. & Inspection 
24 
9204-1 
4/30/1960 
3234 
Inspection Engineering 
Insp. Engr. 
. 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3234 
Inspection Engineering 
Inspection Engr. 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3234 
Inspection Engineering 
Inspection. Engr. 
.2024 
1/1/1993 
3234 
Off, of Quality Progs. & Inspection 
24 
2024 
12/31/1981 
3234 
Quality Assur. & Inspection 
24 
2024 
1/1/1993 
3235 
Off. of Quality Progs. & Inspection 
24 
2024 
1/1/1993 
3236 
Off. of Quality Progs. & Inspection 
24 
2024 
12/31/1981 
3236 
- 
Quality Assur. & Inspection 
24 
1/1/1993 
3271 
Executive Offices 
- 
90 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3290 
Analytical Chemistry 
Anal. Chem. 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3290 
Analytical Chemistry 
- 
Anal. Chem. 
7/14/1949 
3295 
Wage Standards 
- 
- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3315 
Civil Defense 
Civil Def. Res. Proj. 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3320 
Electronuclear 
. 
Electronuclear 
- 
6000 
8/31/1970 
3320 
Electronuclear 
Electronuclear 
3042 
8/31/1970 
3325 
HFIR Operations 
Operations 
3042 
4/30/1964 
3325 
HFIR Preoperations 
Operations 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3325 
- 
Operations R&D 
27 
3047 
1/1/1993 
3325 
Waste Mgmt. & Remedial Action 
27 
7917 
1/1/1993 
3330 
Research Reactors 
6 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3336 
. 
Central Mgmt. Offices 
20 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3337 
Central Mgmt. Offices 
- 
20 
7/14/1949 
3340 
Associate Director's Department 
. 
. 
Euilding Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
4500 
9204-1 
4/30/1960 
4/30/1960 
3200 
3200 
Constr. Prog. Coord. 
Director's Dept. - Admn. 
Lab. Serv. Supt. - 
- 
Lab. Serv. Supt. 
3550 
4/30/1960 
3200 
Shift Superintendent 
Lab. Serv. Supt. 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3200 
Central Management 
20 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3200 
Central Mgmt. Offices 
20 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3201 
Radiation Safety & Control 
Asst. Deputy Director 
- 
Division # 
Deputy Res. Director 
Division Information 
Asst. Res. Director 
Department Description 
Research & Development 
Homogeneous Reactor Project 
Dept # 
3340 
3340 
Date 
5/1/1953 
5/1/1953 
) 
) 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3340 
Research Director 
Research Director 
3500 
8/31/1970 
3341 
Instr. & Contr. 
Instr. & Controls 
3500 
3500 
4/30/1960 
4/30/1964 
3341 
3341 
Instr. & Controls 
Instr. & Controls 
Instr. & Controls 
Instr. & Controls 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15 
7/14/1949 
3350 
Mathematics Panel 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3350 
Mathematics Panel 
- 
Math. Panel 
- 
Isotopes 
3047 
4/30/1964 
3360 
Radioisotope R & D 
- 
Isotopes 
- 
- 
- 
3047 
8/31/1970 
3360 
Radioisotope R & D 
Isotopes 
- 
- 
3037 
4/30/1960 
3360 
Radioisotope Res. & Dev. 
- 
Isotopes 
- 
3047 
4/30/1964 
3360 
Target Devel. & Production 
Isotopes 
3047 
8/31/1970 
3361 
Isotopes Engineering 
Isotopes 
- 
3037 
8/31/1970 
3363 
Radioisotope Technology 
Isotopes 
3047 
8/31/1970 
3365 
Isotope Trng. & Information 
Isotopes 
- 
3037 
8/31/1970 
3369 
Isotopes Target Preparation R & D 
Isotopes 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3370 
Chemical Technology 
Chem; Tech. 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3370 
Chemical Technology 
Chemical Technology 
- 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3340 
Director's Department - Research 
Director 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3340 
Radiation Safety & Control 
Director 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3340 
Reactor Evaluation 
Director 
9204-1 
4/30/1960 
3340 
Thermal Breeder Program 
Director 
- 
4500S 
1/1/1993 
3341 
Instr. & Contls (R&D) 
- 
9 
3500 
12/31/1981 
3341 
. 
Instr. & Controls R&D 
9 
4500N 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
1/1/1993 
3345 
3345 
Energy 
Energy 
- 
15 
- 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3350 
Mathematics 
- 
Mathematics 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3350 
Mathematics 
- 
Mathematics - 
- 
Building 
9204-1 
9204-1 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3350 
Mathematics Panel 
Mathematics Panel 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3350 
. 
Computing Applications 
10 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3355 
. 
Information R&D 
7 
3026-C 
3047 
4/30/1964 
4/30/1964 
3360 
3360 
Engineering 
- 
Isotope Infor. & Publications 
Isotopes - 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3370 
Chemical Technology 
Chemical Technology 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3370 
Chemical Technology 
Chemical Tecjinology 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3370 
Chemical Technology 
3 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3370 
Chemical Technology 
3 
- 
7601 
12/31/1981 
3375 
Fuel Recycle 
14 
7601 
1/1/1993 
3375 
Robotics & Process Systems 
- 
14 
. 
. 
- 
- 
Physics 
- 
) 
) 
X-1O Department, Building, Division Listing 
42 
1505 
4500 
12/31/1981 
4/30/1960 
3380 
3390 
Analytical Chemistry 
Environmental Sciences 
Anal. Chem. 
42 
4500 
7/14/1949 
5/1/1953 
3405 
3405 
Physics Division 
Physics 
Engineering Technology 
- 
12 
7 
7/14/1949 
3420 
Chemistry Division 
- 
- 
- 
4500 
5/1/1953 
3420 
Chemistry 
Chemistry 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3420 
Chemistry 
Chemistry 
- 
- 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3390 
Anal. Chem. 
Anal. Chemistry 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3390 
Analytical Chemistry 
Analytical Chemistry 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3390 
Analytical Cbem. 
- - 
I 
4500S 
1/1/1993 
3390 
. 
Analytical Chemistry 
1 
4500 
4500N 
4/30/1960 
4/30/1964 
3405 
3405 
Physics 
Physics 
Physics 
Physics 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3405 
Physics 
J>hysics 
- 
- 
6000 
12/31/1981 
3405 
- 
Physics 
13 
- 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3420 
Chemistry 
Chemistry 
- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3420 
Chemistry 
Chemistry 
- 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
3420 
. 
•Chemistry 
4 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3420 
Chemistry 
- 
4 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3430 
React. Chem. 
React. Chem. 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3430 
Reactor Chemistry 
Reactor Chem. 
- 
9733-1 
4/30/1960 
3430 
Reactor Chemistry 
Reactor Chemistry 
7/14/1949 
3435 
Technical Division 
.. 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
3450 
Cemter for Computational Sciences 
55 
7/14/1949 
3455 
Biology Division 
- 
7/14/1949 
3470 
- 
Metallurgy Division 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3470 
Met. & Cer. 
- 
Met. & Ceramics 
6000 
1/1/1993 
3405 
Physics 
13 
4500 
4/30/1960 
3410 
Neutron Physics 
- 
Neutron Physics 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
3410 
Neutron Physics 
Neutron Physics 
6025 
8/31/1970 
3410 
Neutron Physics 
Neutron Physics 
-- 
6025 
12/31/1981 
3410 
. 
Engineering Physics 
12 
6025 
K-1225 
1/1/1993 
1/1/1993 
3410 
3415 
Engr. Physics & Math 
9204-1 
4/30/1960 
3435 
Reactor Exp. Engr. 
REE 
- 
9201-3 
4/30/1964 
3435 
Reactor 
Reactor 
9201-3 
8/31/1970 
3435 
Reactor 
Reactor - 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
2001 
1505 
8/31/1970 
1/1/1993 
3380 
3380 
Ecological Sciences 
- 
Ecological Sciences 
Environ. Sciences 
) 
) 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
3022 
4/30/1960 
3612 
Elec. Distr. System 
' 
Engineering & Mechanical 
1000 
4/30/1964 
3612 
Elec. Distr. System 
Plant & Equipment 
. 
- 
Education & Univ. Relations 
7/14/1949 
3490 
Health Physics Division 
2001 
5/1/1953 
3490 
Health Physics 
Health Physics 
2001 
4/30/1960 
3490 
Health Physics 
Health Physics 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3490 
Health Physics 
Health Physics 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
3490 
Health Physics 
- 
Health Physics 
- 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3490 
Health & Safety Res. 
8 
4500S 
1/1/1993 
3490 
Health & Safety Res. 
8 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3601 
- 
Operations - Radioisotope Prod. 
32 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3602 
. 
Operations - Radioisotope Prod. 
32 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3604 
Operations - Radioisotope Prod. 
32 
7/14/1949 
3612 
Electrical Distribution System 
. 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3612 
Elect. Distr. Syst 
Engineering &Mintenance 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
2000 
5/1/1953 
3470 
Metallurgy 
Metallurgy 
2000 
4/30/1960 
3470 
Metallurgy 
Metallurgy 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
3470 
Metals & Ceramics 
Metals & Ceramics 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
3470 
Metals & Ceramics 
11 
4500S 
1/1/1993 
3470 
Metals & Ceramics 
11 
3025 
5/1/1953 
3475 
Solid State 
- 
Solid State 
3025 
4/30/1960 
3475 
Solid State 
Solid State 
3025 
4/30/1964 
3475 
Solid State 
Solid State 
3025 
8/31/1970 
3475 
Solid State 
Solid State 
3025 
12/31/1981 
3475 
Solid State 
18 
3025 
1/1/1993 
3475 
Solid State 
18 
K-703 
8/31/1970 
3477 
Molecular Anatomy Program 
Molecular Anatomy Program 
7/14/1949 
3480 
Technical Training 
2068 
5/1/1953 
3480 
Educ. Rd. & Trng. 
Educ. Rel. & Training 
2068 
4/30/1960 
3480 
Education 
Education 
2068 
4/30/1964 
3480 
Education 
Education 
2068 
5/1/1953 
3481 
School of Reactor Technology 
Educ. Rd. & Training 
- 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3482 
Research Participation 
Asst. Dir for Prof. Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3482 
Research Participation & Travel Lecture 
Asst. Dir, for Prof. Personnel & Univ. R 
2068 
5/1/1953 
3482 
Res Part. Prog., H. P. & Biology 
Educ. Rel. & Training 
- 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3482 
Research Participation & Travel Lecture 
Education & Univ. Relations 
1000 
4/30/1960 
3483 
Travel Lecture Program 
Asst. Dir for Prof. Personnel 
4500 
4/30/1964 
3483 
Research Participation & Travel Lecture 
Asst. Dir. for Prof. Personnel & Univ. R 
2068 
5/1/1953 
3483 
Res Part. Prog., Science & Engr. 
Educ. Rel. & Training 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
3483 
Research Participation & Travel Lecture 
- 
21 
21 
- 
- 
Plant&Equipment 
Plant & Equipment 
Isotopes 
3612 
3612 
3614 
3615 
Isotopes Division Adm. 
S. F. Material Control 
12/31/1981 
1/1/1993 
8/31/1970 
7/14/1949 
) 
) 
) 
X-1O Department, Building, Division Listing 
3037 
4/30/1964 
3615 
SS Accountability 
Isotopes 
- 
3037 
8/31/1970 
3615 
SS Accountability 
Isotopes 
-. 
3001 
4/30/1960 
3615 
SSN & Isotope Accountability 
Isotopes 
7/14/1949 
3630 
Chemical Operations 706-D 
. 
3037 
5/1/1953 
3630 
Chemical Operations 
Operations 
3026 
4/30/1964 
3632 
Liquid & Gaseous Waste Disposal 
Operations 
- 
3026 
8/31/1970 
3632 
Liquid & Gaseous Waste Disposal 
Operations 
- 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3632 
Liquid & Gaseous Waste Disposal 
- 
Operations 
: 
3026 
4/30/1964 
3634 
Equipment Decontamination 
Operations 
- 
3026 
8/31/1970 
3634 
Equipment Decontamination 
Operations 
- 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3634 
Equipment Decontamination 
Operations 
3042 
8/31/1970 
3636 
- 
Bulk Shielding Reactor Oprs. 
Operations 
7/14/1949 
3638 
Isotope Development-Radium & Beryllium 
- 
: 
3037 
5/1/1953 
3638 
Radioisotope Development 
Operations 
3042 
4/30/1960 
3639 
Research Reactor 
Operations 
3042 
4/30/1964 
3639 
Research Reactor 
Operations 
- 
3042 
8/31/1970 
3639 
Research Reactor 
- 
Operations - 
- 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3639 
Operations (Services) 
28 
7/14/1949 
3640 
Isotope Control Department 
- 
- 
- 
3037 
4/30/1960 
3640 
Isotope Sales 
Isotopes 
3037 
4/30/1964 
3640 
Isotope Sales 
Isotopes 
3037 
8/31/1970 
3640 
Isotope Sales 
Isotopes 
. 
3037 
5/1/1953 
3640 
Radioisotope Sales 
Operations 
7/14/1949 
3641 
Pile Operations - 100 Area 
3001 
5/1/1953 
3641 
Reactor Operations 
Operations 
- 
3042 
3042 
4/30/1960 
4/30/1960 
3641 
3642 
Reactor Operations 
Low Intensity Test Reactor 
Operations 
Operations 
3042 
4/30/1964 
3642 
Low Intensity Test Reactor 
Operations 
- 
3001 
4/30/1960 
3643 
Reactor Operations Tech. 
Operations 
3001 
4/30/1964 
3643 
Reactor Operations Tech. 
Operations 
- 
3001 
8/31/1970 
3643 
Reactor Operations Tech. 
Operations 
7/14/1949 
3648 
Water Distribution System 
- 
. 
- 
3026 
4/30/1964 
3648 
Treated Water Distr. System 
Operations 
3026 
8/31/1970 
3648 
Treated Water Distr. System 
- 
Operations 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
2518 
8/31/1970 
3612 
Elec. Distr. System 
Plant & Equipment 
2518 
2518 
3047 
) 
) 
) 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
3037 
4/30/1960 
3650 
Radioisotope Prod. 
Isotopes 
3037 
4/30/1964 
3657 
Radioisotope Tech. Services 
Isotopes 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3671 
Laboratory Facilities 
Operations 
3525 
4/30/1964 
3674 
Hot Cell Operations 
Operations 
3525 
8/31/1970 
3674 
Hot Cell Operations 
Operations 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3674 
Operations (Services) 
28 
3026 
4130/1964 
3725 
Air Compressor 
Operations 
3026 
813 1/1970 
3725 
Air Compressor 
Operations 
. 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3725 
Air Compressor 
Operations 
7/14/1949 
3743 
Steam Plant 
S 
2610 
5/1/1953 
3743 
Steam Plant 
Engineering & Maintenance 
- 
2068 
4/30/1960 
4112 
Photography 
Technical Information 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
4112 
Photography 
- 
Technical Information 
- 
- 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
4112 
. 
Information 
31 
4500N 
4/30/1964 
4163 
Statistical Services 
Mathematics 
. 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
4163 
- 
Statistical Services 
Mathematics 
4500S 
1/1/1993 
4175 
-Office of Radiation Protection 
38 
2001 
4/30/1960 
4192 
Y-12 Pers. Montr. 
Health Physics 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
4193 
ORNL - Y-12 Rad. Survey 
Appi. Health Physics &. Safety - 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
4193 
ORNL - Y-12 Rad. Survey 
Health Physics 
2001 
4/30/1960 - 
4193 
Y-12 Rad. Survey 
- 
Health Pbysics 
. 
4500S 
12/31/1981 
4193 
Industrial Safety & Appi. Health Physics - 
- 
36 
3026 
4/30/1964 
3743 
Steam Plant 
Operations 
3026 
8/31/1970 
3743 
Steam Plant 
Operations 
3048 
4/30/1960 
3743 
Steam Plant 
Operations 
- 
- 
2518 
1/1/1993 
3743 
. 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
3047 
12/31/1981 
3743 
Operations (Services) 
28 
2518 
1/1/1993 
4021 
Bldg. Maint. ORNL @ Y-12 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
2518 
12/31/1981 
4021 
Bldg. Maint. ORNL at Y-12 
- 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
4500N 
8/31/1970 
4047 
Libraries 
Technical Information 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
4047 
. 
Information 
31 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
4099 
. 
- 
Information 
31 
4500NA 
8/31/1970 
4112 
ORNL Y-12 Photography 
- 
Technical Information 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
DivisiOn # 
3048 
4130/1960 
3648 
Treated Water Distr. System 
Operations 
- 
3042 
4/30/1960 
3649 
Demineralized Water Plant 
Operations 
3042 
4/30/1964 
3649 
Demineralized Water Plant 
Operations 
3042 
8/31/1970 
3649 
Demineralized Water Plant 
Operations 
3037 
4/30/1964 
3650 
Radioisotope Processing 
Isotopes 
3037 
8/31/1970 
3650 
Radioisotope Processing 
- 
Isotopes 
- 
) 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
9731 
8/31/1970 
4360 
Stable Isotopes R & D 
Isotopes 
- 
9207 
4/30/1960 
4455 
Biology 
Biology 
- 
9207 
4/30/1964 
4455 
Biology 
- 
Biology 
- 
4500 
4/30/1960 
4390 
Analytical Chemistry - 
- 
Anal. Chem 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
4390 
Anal. Chem. 
Anal. Chemistry 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
4390 
Analytical Chemistry. 
Analytical Chemistry 
- 
- - 
4500S 
1/1/1993 
4390 
Analytical Chemistry 
1 
4500 
4/30/1960 
4405 
Physics 
Physics 
- 
4500 
4/30/1960 
4420 
Chemistry 
Chemistry 
4500S 
8/31/1970 
4430 
React. Chem. 
React. Chem. 
- 
, 
9731 
4/30/1960 
4360 
Stable Isotopes Res. & Dev. 
- 
Isotopes 
9731 
4/30/1960 
4362 
Special Separations 
- 
Isotopes 
9731 
4/30/1964 
4362 
Special Separations 
Isotopes 
-. 
9731 
8/31/1970 
4362 
- 
Special Separations 
- 
Isotopes 
3047 
4/30/1964 
4364 
Thermal Diffusion R & D 
Isotopes 
4500 
4/30/1960 
4370 
Chemical Technology 
- 
Chemical Technology 
-- 
4500N 
1/1/1993 
4370 
Chemical Technology 
3 
9704-1 
5/1/1953 
4380 
Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion 
ANP 
9201-3 
4/30/1960 
4380 
Reactor Projects 
Asst. Director 
- 
4500S 
4/30/1964 
4430 
Reactor Chemistry 
Reactor Chemistry 
9733-1 
4/30/1960 
4430 
Reactor Chemistry 
Reactor Chemistry 
- 
9204-1 
5/1/1953 
4435 
Reactor Exper. Engr. 
R.E.E. 
9204-1 
4/30/1960 
4435 
Reactor Exp. Engr. 
REE 
9201-3 
4/30/1964 
4435 
Reactor 
Reactor 
9201-3 
8/31/1970 
4435 
- 
Reactor 
Reactor 
9201-3 
12/31/1981 
4435 
. 
Eng. Technology- 
16 
9201-3 
1/1/1993 
4435 
Engineering Technology 
16 
9207 
5/1/1953 
4455 
- 
Biology 
- 
Biology 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
4500 
4/30/1960 
4270 
Analytical Chemistry 
Anal. Chem. 
9733-2 
5/1/1953 
4270 
Chemical Analysis 
Anal. Chem. 
4500 
4/30/1960 
4290 
Analytical Chemistry 
Anal. Chem. 
9733-1 
5/1/1953 
4300 
Materials Chemistry 
Mat. Chem. 
9204-3 
5/1/1953 
4320 
Electromagnetic Research 
Elect. Res. 
9204-3 
4/30/1960 
4320 
Electronuclear Research 
Electro. Research 
3047 
12/31/1981 
4325 
Operations R&D 
-. 
2T 
9204-1 
5/1/1953 
4342 
Long Range ReactOr Planning 
Long Range Reactor Planning 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
4355 
Information R&D 
- 
7 
- 
9731 
5/1/1953 
4360 
Isotope Research & Prod. 
Iso. Res. & Prod. 
9731 
4/30/1964 
4360 
Stable Isotopes R & D 
Isotopes 
- 
X-1O Department, Building, Division Listing 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
9207 
8/31/1970 
4455 
Biology 
Biology 
- 
9207 
12/31/1981 
4455 
Biology 
2 
9207 
1/1/1993 
4455 
Biology 
2 
9201-2 
4/30/1964 
4460 
Thermonuclear 
Asst. Director 
9201-2 
8/31/1970 
4460 
Thermonuclear 
Thermonuclear 
920 1-2 
4/30/1960 
4460 
Thermonuclear Exp. 
- 
Thermonuclear Exp. 
9201-2 
12/31/1981 
4460 
Fusion Energy 
19 
9201-2 
1/1/1993 
4460 
. 
Fusion Energy 
19 
2001 
4/30/1960 
4490 
Y-12 H. P. Research 
Health Physics 
. 
3047 
12/31/1981 
4602 
Operations - Radioisotope Prod. 
Operations - Radioisotope Prod. 
32 
3047 
12/31/1981 
4603 
32 
9731 
4/30/1960 
4647 
Stable Isotopes 
Isotopes 
9731 
4/30/1964 
4650 
Electromagnetic Sep. 
Isotopes 
9731 
8/31/1970 
4650 
Electromagnetic Sep. 
Isotopes 
9731 
4/30/1960 
4650 
Stable Isotopes Prod. 
Isotopes 
JacksonPlz 
1/1/1993 
8137 
Business Systems 
95 
K-1007 
1/1/1993 
8139 
Off. of the Controller 
62. 
1580/K-25 
1/1/1993 
8142 
Computing & Telecommunications 
63 
Com.Pk. 
1/1/1993 
8146 
Off, of the Treasurer 
60 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
8161 
. 
Computer Sciences 
- 
63 
1580/K-25 
1/1/1993 
8161 
Computing & Telecommunications 
63 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
8162 
Computer Sciences 
63 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
8163 
Computer Sciences 
63 
15801K-25 
1/1/1993 
8164 
- 
Computing & Telecommunications 
63 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
8165 
Computer Sciences 
63 
1580/K-25 
1/1/1993 
8165 
Computing & Telecommunications 
63 
1580/K-25 
1/1/1993 
8166 
- 
Computing & Telecommunications 
63 
1580/K-25 
1/1/1993 
8167 
Computing & Telecommunications 
63 
4500N 
12/31/1981- 
8169 
Computer Sciences 
63 
1580/K-25 
1/1/1993 
8169 
Computing & Telecommunications 
- 
63 
4500N 
12/31/1981 
8170 
Computer Sciences 
63 
Townsite 
1/1/1993 
8191 
Procurement 
64 
K-1200 
1/1/1993 
8360 
. 
Environ. Restor. Off. 
87 
1000 
12/31/1981 
8410 
. 
- 
Engineering 
69 
1000 
1/1/1993 
8410 
• 
Engineering 
69 
9704-2 
1/1/1993 
8700 
Info' Res. &Admin; 
70 
9739 
1/1/1993 
8701 
. 
- 
Graphics 
- 
71 
Com.Pk. 
1/1/1993 
8702 
. 
Informatioi Services 
- 
72 
Com.Pk. 
1/1/1993 
8703 
- 
Publications 
- 
- 73 
1/27/1948 
A5OR 
Cafeteria 
- 
- 
1127/1948 
A5OS 
- 
Stores Department 
- 
1/27/1948 
A5OT 
Trant;portation (Exclusive of A51T) 
. 
1/27/1948 
A5OU 
Power Department (Exclusive of M5OS,M5OT 
- 
1/27/1948 
A5OW 
Plant Design Department 
- 
7/14/1949 
A5ON 
Mechanical Department-Maintenance &Shops 
- 
7/14/1949 
A5OR 
Cafeteria & Canteens 
- 
7/14/1949 
A5OS 
Stores Section 
- 
7/14/1949 
A5OT 
- 
Transportation 
. 
7/14/1949 
A50E 
Instrument Department 
. 
) 
) 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
703-B 
8/11/1948 
A5OT 
Trans. 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
703-B 
8/11/1948 
A5OU 
Power 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
- 
7/14/1949 
A5OW 
Engineering Department 
. 
. 
- 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
A5ON 
Mechanical Maintenance (ExA5OE,A5OT,A51T 
717-B 
8/11/1948 
A5ON 
Mech. Maint. 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A5OR 
Cafeteria 
- 
Personnel & Services 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A5OS 
Stores 
General Offices 
1/27/1948 
A5OE 
Mechanical Department - Instruments 
717-B 
8/11/1948 
A5OE 
Inst. 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
7/14/1949 
A5OG 
Laboratory Protection 
1/27/1948 
A5OG 
Plant Protection 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A5OG 
Plant Prot. 
Security 
1127/1948 
A50H 
Health Physics Department 
104-B 
8/11/1948 
A5OH 
Health Physics 
Health Physics 
1/27/1948 
A5OJ 
Employee Services 
7/14/1949 
A50J 
Service Department 
: 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A5OJ 
Services 
Personnel & Services 
- 
1/27/1948 
A5OL 
Employment & Personnel 
. 
7/14/1949 
A5OL 
Personnel & Employment Department 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A50L 
Personnel 
Personnel & Services 
7/14/1949 
A5OM 
General Office 
. 
1/27/1948 
A5OM 
General Offices 
- 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A5OM 
Gen. Offices 
General Offices 
7/14/1949 
A50A 
Janitors Department 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A5OA 
Janitor 
Personnel & Services 
7/14/1949 
A50D 
Health Division 
1/27/1948 
A5OD 
Medical Department 
719 
8/11/1948 
A5OD 
Medical 
- 
Health 
- 
Building Date 
Dept ft 
Department Description 
[ 
Division Information 
Division# 
.__________ 
1/27/1948 
A5OA 
Janitors Department 
- 
- 
. 
- 
General Offices 
- 
HealthPhysicsDept.UrinalysiS (CostCenter 
. 
V 
1/27/1948 
A53H 
Health Physics Department-Survey Group 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
1/27/1948 
A53J 
A54H 
Training-Industrial Relations 
1/27/1948 
A54J 
Jury Duty (Cost Center) 
7/14/1949 
A55H 
Personnel Monitoring 
- 
- 
V 
1/27/1948 
A52H 
Health Physics Department-Personnel Moni 
- 
- 
1/27/ 1948 
A52J 
Laundry 
V 
- 
1/27/1948 
A52S 
Tool Department 
7/14/1949 
A52S 
Tool Section 
7/14/ 1949 
A52G 
Fire Department 
1/27/1948 
A52G 
Fire Protection 
- 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
A51T 
- Maintenance - Automotive Equipment 
7/14/1949 
A51T 
Maintenance-Automotive Equipment(Normal) 
- 
7/14/1949 
A5 1W 
New Facilities Design 
1/27/1948 
A51W 
Research Engineering - Shops 
- 
) 
X-1O Department, Building, Division Listing 
1/27/1948 
A5OX 
Maintenance-Grounds 
1/27/1948 
A5OZ 
Maintenance - Buildings 
. 
1/27! 1948 
A51G 
Guard Department 
7/14/1949 
A51G 
Patrol Department 
- 
720 
8/11/1948 
A51G 
Guard 
Security 
1/27/1948 
A51H 
Health Physics Department-Instrument Ser 
. 
- 
7/14/1949 
A52J 
Laundry 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A52J 
Laundry 
Personnel & Services 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A52S 
Tools 
Research Engineering-Design 
1/27/1948 
A52W 
1/27/1948 
A53G 
Safety Department 
7/14/1949 
A53G 
Safety Department 
735-A 
8/11/1948 
A53G 
Safety 
Personnel & Services 
7/14/1949 
A51H 
Radiation Survey-Monitoring (General) 
. . 
104-B 
8/11/1948 
A51H 
-Rad. Sur. Mon. 
Ha1th Physics 
- 
- 
703-B 
8/11/1948 
A5 iT 
Maint. Auto. 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
- 
735-A 
8/11/1948 
A52G 
Fire Prot. 
Personnel & Services 
1/27/1948 
A51J 
Recreation & Athletics 
7/14/1949 
A5IJ 
Recreation & Athletics 
- 
V 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A51J 
Recreation - 
Personnel & Services 
1/27/1948 
A51S 
Receving and Shipping Department 
- 
- 
- 
7/14/1949 
A5IS 
Receiving and Shipping Section 
- 
. 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A51S 
Recv. & Shipping 
General Offices 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A5OW 
Engineering 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division II 
. 
. 
1/27/1948 
H200L 
Research & Development - Physics Div. 
• 
1/27/1948 
B5OB 
Purchasing Department 
1/27/1948 
B5OF 
Freight, Express and Cartage (CostCenter 
. 
1/27/1948 
B5OK 
Inventory Adjustment (CostCenter) 
- 
- 
. 
1/27/1948 
B5OP 
Employee Plans (CostCenter) 
1/27/1948 
B5OS 
Scrap Material (Cost Center) 
1/27/1948 
B5OT 
Telephone, Telegraph & Postage (CostCtr) 
1/27/1948 
B5OW 
Compens.,Pub.Liabil.,Soc.Sec.Tax(CostCtr 
- 
1/27/1948 
B51A 
Convention Attendances 
. 
1/27/1948 
B51W 
Tennes3ee Sales & Use Tax (CostCenter) 
7/14/1949 
B52A 
Wage Standards 
- 
7/14/1949 
H300L 
Chemistry Division 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
H300L- 
Research & Development - Chemistry Div - 
- 
- 
- 
7/14/1949 
A66J 
Insurance Section 
. 
1213 1/1963 
CHEM 
. 
Chemistry Division 
CHEM 
12/31/1963 
FUS 
- 
Fusion Research 
- 
FUS 
1/27/1948 
H100L 
Libraries 
) 
T) 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
• 
7/14/1949 
H100L 
- 
Libraries 
. 
- 
703-A 
8/11/1948 
B52A 
- 
Wage Stds. 
- 
WagèStds. 
- 
703-A 
8/11/1948 
H100L 
- 
Library 
Director 
7/14/1949 
H200L 
Physics Division 
- 
706-B 
8/11/1948 
H200L 
Physics 
Physics 
. 
706-A 
8I11/1948 
H300L 
Chemistry 
Chemistry 
- 
- 
7/14/1949 
B5OA 
Director's Department 
1/27/1948 
B5OA 
Superintendents Department 
Supt. 
7O3-A 
8/11/1948 
B5OA 
Director 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
1/27/1948 
A55J 
Termination Allowance (Cost Center) 
- 
1/27/1948 
A56J 
Occupational Disability Payments(CostCtr 
1/27/1948 
A57J 
Non-occupational Diability (CostCenter) 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A57L 
Labor Re!. 
Personnel & Services 
1/27/148 
A58J 
Meal Allowance (Cost Center) 
7/14/1949 
A6OH 
Radiation Survey 
- 
703-C 
8/11/1948 
A6OL 
Emp. Training 
Personnel & Services 
7/14/1949 
A6ON 
Research Shops Department 
717-BB 
8/11/1948 
A6ON 
Research Shops Dept. 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
7/14/1949 
A63J 
Labor Relations Department 
7/14/1949 
A64J 
Photography 
7/14/1949 
A65H 
Instrument & Assay Group 
7/14/1949 
A65J 
Employee Training Department 
. 
. 
7/14/1949 
H5OL 
Associate Director's Department 
- 
- 
- 
1/27/1948 
H5OL 
Research & Development-Overhead 
- 
1/27/1948 
H5OW 
Charges to ABC (CostCenter) 
- 
-_- 
1/27/1948 
H5OW 
Work or Outside Parties (Cost Center) 
7/14/1949 
H51L 
Mathematics Panel 
. 
7/14/1949 
H900L 
Health Physics Division 
- 
- 
- 
- 
X-1O Department, Building, Division Listing 
) 
) 
1/27/1948 
M5OP 
Pile Operations - 100 Area 
7/14/1949 
M5OP 
Pile Operations - 100 Area 
105 
8/11/1948 
M5OP 
Pile Operations 
Operations 
1/27/1948 
M5OS 
Steam Plant 
- 
703-A 
8/11/1948 
H500L 
Power Pile 
Power Pile 
1/27/1948 
H5OF 
Deferred Charge Orders (Cost Center) 
. 
703-A 
8/11/1948 
1150L 
Res. Dev. Ov'H. 
Director 
1/27/1948 
H5OT 
Manufacure Small Tools&Supplies(CostCtr 
- 
7/14/1949 
H600L 
Biology Division 
1/27/1948 
H600L 
Reseatch & Development - Biology Div 
9207 
8/11/1948 
H600L 
Biology 
Biology 
- 
-- 
7/14/1949 
H700L 
Metallurgy Division 
1/27/ 1948 
H700L 
Research & Development-Metallurgy 
703-A 
8/11/1948 
H700L 
Metallurgy 
Metallurgy 
1/27/1948 
H800L 
Research & Development-Training Div. 
- 
- 
7/14/1949 
H800L 
Technical Training 
104-B 
8/11/1948 
H900L 
H. P. Res. 
- 
Health Physics - 
7/14/1949 
M5OC 
Chemical Operations 706-D 
1/27/1948 
M5OC 
Chemical Operations, 706D Area 
706-D 
8/11/1948 
M5OC 
Chem. Oper. 
Operations 
1/27/1948 
M5OD 
Isotope Development 
7/14/1949 
M5OD 
Isotope Development-Radium & Beryllium 
- 
735-B 
8/11/1948 
M5OD 
Isotope Dev. 
Operations 
7/14/1949 
M5OE 
Isotope Control Department 
1/27/1948 
M5OE 
Operations Service Department 
735-B 
8/11/1948 
MSOE 
Oper. Service 
Operations 
7/14/1949 
M5OK 
Electrical Distribution System 
- 
- 
- 
. 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
1/27/1948 
H3O1L 
Chemical Analysis (CostCenter) 
Research & Development - Technical Div 
1/27/1948 
H400L 
7/14/1949 
H400L 
Technical Division 
703-A 
8/11/1948 
H400L 
Technical 
Technical 
1/27/1948 
H4O1L 
Hot Pilot Plant (CostCenter) 
- 
1/27/1948 
H500L 
Researc & Development - Power Pile Div - 
Di 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
1/27/1948 
M51D 
Radium and Beryllium (CostCenter) 
1/27/1948 
M51P 
Pile Operations - Isotopes (CostCenter) 
12/31/1994 
Research Reactors 
6 
3/8/1995 
Research Reactors 
- 
- 
6 
7/1/1975 
Information-Research & Development 
7 
7/1/1975 
. 
Health Physics 
8 
12/31/1994 
. 
Health Sciences Research 
8 
3/8/1995 
- Health Sciences Research 
8 
12/31/1994 
Instr. & Controls (R&D) 
9 
• 
3/8/1995 
Instrumentation & Controls (R&D) 
9 
7/1/1975 
Instrumentation & Controls R&D. 
9 
3/8/1995 
. 
Computational Physics & Engineering - 
1 
7/1/1975 
Computer Sciences - Research 
- 
10 
. 
1/27/1948 
M52C 
Tank Farm Area (CostCenter) 
. 
12/31/1963 
MED 
Medical Division 
MED 
12/31/1963 
METAL 
Metallurgy 
METAL 
12/31/1963 
PHYS 
Physics Research and Development 
PHYS 
12/31/1963 
RADISO 
Radioisotope Division 
RADISO 
12/31/1963 
SEP 
Separations Development Division 
SEP 
12/31/1963 
SSTATE 
Solid State Physics 
SSTATE 
7/1/1975 
Analytical Chemistry 
1 
12/31/1994 
Analytical Chemistry 
1 
7/1/1975 
Biology 
2 
12/31/1994 
Biology 
2 
3/8/1995 
Biology 
- 
2 
7/1/1975 
Chemical Technology 
3 
12/31/1994 
Chemical Technology 
3 
3/8/1995 
Chemical Technology - 
3 
3/8/1995 
- 
ASO Analytical Support 
4 
12/31/1994 
. 
Chemical & Anal. Sciences 
- 
4 
7/1/1975 
. 
Chemistry 
4 
7/1/1975 
- 
Research Directors 
5 
6/29/1975 
Molecular Anatomy Program 
6 
- 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
• 
7/14/1949 
M5OS 
Steam Plant 
- 
- 
703-B 
8/11/1948 
M5OS 
Steam Plant 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
7/14/1949 
M5OT 
Water Distribution System 
1/27/1948 
M5OT 
Water Treating 
703-B 
8/11/1948 
M5OT 
Water Treating 
Engineering, Maintenance & Construction 
1/27/1948 
M51C 
Isotope Separation (CostCenter) 
- 
- 
- 
18 
- 
21 
Solid 
State 
- 
- 
Fusion Energy 
X-1 0 Department, Building, Division Listing 
- 
14 
3/8/1995 
- 
Robotics & Process Systems 
14 
7/1/1975 
. 
- 
Energy 
15 
- 
7/1/1975 
Plant & Equipment 
3/8/1995 
Plant & Equipment 
- 
21 
- 
13 
12/31/1994 
Robotics & Process Systems 
12/31/1994 
. 
. 
Energy 
- 
15 
3/8/1995 
Energy 
15 
12/31/1994 
- 
Engineering Technology 
16 
3/8/1995 
Engineering Technology 
16 
- 
7/1/1975 
- 
Reactor 
- 
16 -- 
7/1/1975 
• 
. 
Solid State 
18 
12/31/1994 
Solid State 
18 
3/8/1995 
12/31/1994 
- 
- 
12/31/1994 
Plant & Equipment 
21 
12/31/1994 
Office of Oper. Readiness & Facility Saf 
22 
- 
3/8/1995 
Office of Oper. Readiness & Facility Saf 
22 
7/1/1975 
- 
Health 
23 
12/31/1994 
- 
Health 
23 
3/8/1995 
I-Iealth 
23 
- 
7/1/1975 
Inspection Engineering 
24 
12/31/1994 
- 
Office of Quality Programs & Inspection 
- 24 
3/8/1995 
. 
Office of Quality Programs & Inspection 
24 
6/29/1975 
Isotopes Research & Development 
25 
19 
3/8/1995 
Fusion Energy 
19 
7/1/1975 
Thermonuclear 
- 
- 
19 
3/8/1995 
Central Management Offices 
20 
. 
12/31/1994 
Central Mgmt. Offices 
20 
7/1/1975 
. 
Directors Administration 
20 
Building Date 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Information 
Division # 
12/31/1994 
Computing Applications 
10 
7/1/1975 
. 
Metals & Ceramics 
11 
12/31/1994 
. 
Metals & Ceramics 
11 
3/8/1995 
Metals & Ceramics 
11 
3/8/1995 
. 
Computer Science & Mathematics 
12 
12/31/1994 
Engr. Physics & Math 
12 
7/1/1975 
Neutron Physics 
-. 
12 
7/1/1975 
. 
Physics 
13 
12/31/1994 
. 
- 
Physics 
- 
- 
13 
- 
3/8/1995 
Physics 
) 
- - 29 
31 
Laboratory Protection 
Division # 
26 
Human Resources 
Information - Services 
- 
Operations - Radioisotopes Production 
31 
. 
- 
Lnstr. & Controls (Services) 
34 
X-1O Department, Building, Division Listing 
7/1/1975 
Solid State-Target Preparation (New) 
39 
711/1975 
3/8/1995 
Instrumentation & Controls (Services) 
34 
7/1/1975 
Instrumentation & Controls - Services 
34 
7/1/1975 
Computer Scienccs - Services 
35 
7/1/1975 
Applied Health Physics 
- 
3/8/1995 
- 
Office of Safety &Health Prot. 
36 
7/1/1975 
. 
Operations - Services 
28 
7/1/1975 
Employee Relations 
29 
3/8/1995 
Office of Science & Technology Partnersh 
3/8/1995 
Property and Materials Management 
Sci. 
52 
55 
12/31/1994 
Center for Computational 
55 
3/8/1995 
Center for Computational Sci. 
— 
60 
3/8/1995 
Chemical & Analytical Sciences 
60 
12/31/1994 
MMES Business Services 
60 
3/8/1995 
MMES Business Services 
. 
General Engineering - R&D 
40 
42 
12/31/1994 
Environ. Sciences 
Environmental Sciences 
42 
7/1/1975 
3/8/1995 
. 
- 
Environmental Sciences 
7/1/1975 
32 
- 
33' 
7/1/1975 
Chemical Technology-Stable Isotopes Prod 
- 
12/31/1994 
12/31/1994 
Off, of Env. Compliance & Doc. 
35 -- 
35 
3/8/1995 
Off. of Env. Compliance & Doc. 
12/31/1994 
Off. of Saf. & Health Prot. 
- 
36 
12/31/1994 
. 
Fin. & Business Mgmt. 
- 
3/8/1995 
Finance -& Business Mgmt. - 
- 
- -37 
37 
7/1/1975 
. 
Finance & Mateiials 
38 
7/1/1975 
General Engineering 
12/31/1994 
Off. of Rad. Protection 
- 
38 
38 
3/8/1995 
Office of Radiation 
3/8/1995 
Office of Lab. Protection 
26 
27 
7/1/1975 
Operations Research & Development 
12/31/1994 
Waste Mgmt. & Remedial Action 
27 
27 
3/8/1995 
Waste Mgmt. & Remedial Action 
12/31/1994 
7/1/1975 
12/31/1994 
. 
Office of Lab. Protection 
26 
Building Date 
7/1/1975 
Dept # 
Department Description 
Division Infonnation 
- 
90 
91 
3/8/1995 
3/8/1995 
Energy Systems Human Resources 
) 
) 
X-10 Department, Building, Division Listing 
Building Date 
Dept # 
[ 
3/8/1995 
Department Description 
Division Information 
61 
Office of Quality Assurance 
- 
62 
12/31/1994 
Off. of the 
Office of the Controller 
62 
3/8/1995 
Services 
63 
12/31/1994 
Computing & Tele. 
Services 
63 
3/8/1995 
Computing 
64 
12/31/1994 
: 
Procurement - 
- 
64 
3/8/1995 
Procurement 
Laboratories 
65 
. 
3/8/1995 
. 
ASO Analytical 
67 
3/8/1995 
ASO Compliance 
Quality 
67 
12/31/1994 
Analytical 
Org. 
Services 
69 
3/8/1995 
Central Engineering 
69 
12/31/1994 
Engineering 
Services 
70 
12/31/1994 
Info. Mgmt. 
'70 
3/8/1995 
Info. Mgmt. 
Org. 
71 
12/31/1994 
Graphics 
Services 
72 
12/31/1994 
73 
12/31/1994 
Restor. 
87 
12/31/1994 
Environ. 
Programs 
Environ. Restor. Programs 
87 
3/8/1995 
. 
Offices 
90 
12/31/1994 
Executive Offices 
C-5
X-O Building Names and Building Numbers
X-10 Building Number and Building Name Listing
Begin Date
Ref Date
Building #
Building Name
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNLO900
Pistol Range
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNLO9OI
154 kV Substation
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNLO9O2
Reservoir
1/1/1948 8/23/1963 ORNLO9O2
Reservoir
1/1/1951
.1/1/1951 ORNLO9O3
Stationary Storage (Bethel Church)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNLO9O4
Oil Storage Tank
.
1/1/1948 8/23/1963 ORNLO9O7
Interim Low Level Facility
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNLI000
Administration and Engineering Bldg
•
1/1/1946 8/23/1963 ORNLI000 •.
Administration Building (P&E Div. Offices@1963)
• *
ORNLIOI
ORNLIO1-B
ORNLI 01-C
.,_________ 12/1/1978 ORNLI000
Engineering
•
.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
AreaFldOff,ResShopsSpecialMaterialLab
Rolling Mill (Metallurgy Division)
Decontamination Hut (Tools&MachineShop)
1/1/1951 ORNLI 01 -D
Metallurgy Laboratory
1/1/1951 ORNLIO2
Research Offices
1/1/1951 ORNLIO3
Vault (Storage of Precious Metals)
1/1/1951 ORNLIO4-A_.
Test Building (Health PhysiOs)
1/1/1951 ORNLIO4-B
Health-Physics Building .
.
1/1/1951 ORNL1O5
Pile Building (Graphite Pile)
1/1/1951 ORNLIO5-E
Storage (Chemical and Instrument)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNLIO5O
Sentry Post #2
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL1O5I
Storage
.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNLIO52
.
Sentry Post#2B
.
12/1/1 978 ORNLI 053-A
Construction Engineenng Office
12/1/1 978 ORNLI 053-B
Construction Engineering Office
...
.
12/1/1 978 ORNLI 054
Engineering Office Anhex
.•..
1/1/1951 ORNL406
Low Intensity Reactor
.
1/1/1951 ORNL107
Physics of Solid States Cell Building
1/1/1951 ORNL114
Graphite PiléAir Filter Building
1/1/1951 ORNL115
Graphite Pile Fan House
1/1/1951 ORNL115-A
Laboratory
1/1/1951 ORNL115-B
Laboratory
.
.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL1500
Lumber & Spare Parts, Cylinder Storage
.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL1501
U.S. WeatherBureau
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL1502
Solvent Storage
-
.
•
12/1/1 978 ORNL1503
Greenhouse Complex
.
12/1/1 978 ORNL1504
Aquatic Ecology Laboratory
12/1/1 978 ORNL1505
Environmental Sciences Laboratory
•
•
12/1/1 978 ORNL1506
Controlled Environment & Animal Bldg
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL1550
Septic Tank
.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL1551
Acid Storage
0RNL1555
Mobile Office Unit
.
.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2000
Metallurgy Laboratory
1/1/1948 8/23/1963 ORNL2000
Metallurgy Laboratories
12/1/1978 ORNL2000
I nspectionEngineeringLabSolidStateAnnex
Plant Wide Electriáal Distribution
.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL20000
•
1/1 /1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL2000I
Gamewall Fire Alarm System
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL20002
Auto-call System
..,
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL20003
Roads and Walkways - Topography
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL20004
Fences
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL20005
.
Burial Ground #1
CS-I
X-1O Building Number and Buildin9 Name Listing
Begin Date Ref Date uilding #
[Building Name
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL20006
Burial Ground #2
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL20007
Burial Ground #3
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL200I
Health-Physics Building.
1/1/1948 8/23/1963 ORN..2OO1
Health Physics Laboratories
•
12/1/1 978 ORNL200I
Environmental Sciences Division
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2002.
Water Tank
1/1/1951
•
1/1/1951
12/1 /1 978
ORNL2003
ORNL2003
Pump House
Process WaterControl Station
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2005
Physics Laboratory
1/1/1944 8123/1963 ORNL2005
Physics Laboratory (demolished by 1963)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL2006
Storage (Chemical and Instrument)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2007
Calibration Buildiflg (Health Physics)
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL2007
Health Physics Test Building
12/1/1978 ORNL2007
Health Physics Calibration Station
1/1/1951
1/1/1946
1/1/1951
8/23/1963
ORNL2008
ORNL2008
Urine Analysis Laboratory
Health Physics Low Level Analysis Lab
12/1/1978 ORN L2008
HealthPhysicsTechnologyl nternaiDosimLab
1/1/1951
111/1951 ORNL2009
Reservoir
.
.
•
12/1/1 978 ORNL2009
Cafeteria Storage Building
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2OIO
.
Cafeteria
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL2OIO
New Cafeteria
1.2/1/1978 ORNL2OIO
Cafeteria
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2OII
Accelerator building
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 ORNL2OII
Original Steam Plant
.
.
12/1/1978 ORNL2OII
.
Mechanical Properties Lab: No. 2
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2OI2
Health Physics
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2OI3
Health Division
111/1943 8/23/1963 ORNL2OI3
Medical and Biological Building (now sto
12/1/1 978 ORNL2OI3
West Maintenance Service Center
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2O14
Emergency Generator
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2OI5
Telephone Vault
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2OI6
Portal Building (Proposed)
12/1/1 978 ORNL2OI6
West Portal
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2O17
Generator House
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2OI8
Carpenter Shop
Electrical and Air Condit. Service Ctr.
12/1/1 978 ORNL2OI8
12/1/1 978 ORNL2OI9
Vertebrate Colony House
1/1/1956 8/23/1963 0RNL2024
Metallurgy Lab Annex
•
12/1/1978 0RNL2024
Inspection Eng.Environ.Sci.Div. Annex A
.
12/1/1 978 0RNL2026
High Radiation Level Analytical .Lab
-
12/1/1 978 0RNL2028
Environ. Sci. Office Annex No. I
12/1/1978 ORN L2029
Information Center Complex
12/1/1 978 ORNL2O3O
Mobile Office unit
12/1/1978 ORN.L2031
Mobile Office Unit
1/1/1951 ORNL2O4
Isolation Building
1/1/1951 ORNL2O5
Pilot Plant
1/1/1951 ORNL2O5-A
Emergency Generator
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2O5I
Sentry Post #12 .
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2052.
Test Building (Health Physics)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2053
Emergency Generator
.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL2O54
Storage (Chemicals & Chemical Equipment)
X-10 Building Number and Building Name Listing
Begin Date
Ref Date
Building #
Building Name
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2055
Storage (Chemicals & Chemical Equipment)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2056
Storage (Chemicals & Chemical Equipment)
111/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2058
Sentry Post#IIC
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2059
Storage (Chemicals & Chemical Equipment)
.
1/1/1951 ORNL2O6
SEE 3023,35073510,3511,3512,3513
1/1/1951 ORNL206-A
Storage (T.V.A.)
1/1/1951 ORNL2O6-B
Chemical Evaporator Building
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2O6I
Smoke Stack
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2067
Administration Building
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2068
Administration Building
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 0RNL2068
Administration Building (ORSORT @1963)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2069
Reactor School
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 0RNL2069
Cafeteria (ORSORT @1963)
12/1/1 978 0RNL2069
Change House
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2073
Paint Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/191 0RNL2074
Paint Shop
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2075
Pump House
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2077
Pickling and Ladder Dipping Vats
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2078
Clock Alley (Sentry Post #4)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2079
Flag Pole
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL2O8O
Accelerator Building Annex
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2085
Paint Shop
.
12/1/1 978 0RNL2093
Environmental Storage (N. of Bldg. 2001)
.
12/1/1978 0RNL2095
Environ.Sciences lnsctary Bldg.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL2500
Guard Headquarters and Fire Headquarters
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 ORNL2500
Patrol and Fire Headquarters
12/1/1 978 ORNL2500
Guard and Fire Headquarters
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL25OI
Change House (Colored Men)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2502
Change House (Colored Women)
1/1/1951 —1/1/1951 0RNL2504
Truck Scales
1/1/1951 —1/1/1951 0RNL2505
Central Shops
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2506
Tool and Pipe Stores, Timekeepers
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 ORN L2506
Instrument Shops
12/1/1 978 0RNL2506
Fabrication Shop and Timekeeping
— .1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2507
Sentry Post #11
.
.
— --
Air Compressor Building
•
12/1/1978 ORl'4L2510.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2512
Pipe Cutting Shop
•
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2513
Sewing Room (for Bldg. 2515).
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2514
Checking Room (for Bldg. 2515)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2515
Laundry
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2516
General Stores
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 0RNL2516
Central Stores
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2517
Safety Department
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 0RNL2517
Safety Department Offices
12/1/1978 0RNL2517
Personnel Development and Systems Dept.
1/1/1951 . 1/1/1951 0RNL2518 .
Change House (White Men)
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL2518
Change House
12/1/1978 0RNL2518
Plant & Equipment Division Offices
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2519
Steam Plant
1/1/1948 8/23/1963 0RNL2519
New Steam Plant
.
12/1/1978 0RNL2519
Steam Plant
C&3
X-1 0 Building Number and Building Name Listing
aegin Date Ref Date
Building #
Building Name
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2520
Garage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2521
Sewage Treatment Plant (Under Construct)
1/1/1951 8/23/1.963 0RNL2521
Sewage Treatment Plant
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2522
Fuel Oil Tank
12/1/1 978 0RNL2522
Fuel Oil Tank
1/1/1955 8/23/1963 0RNL2523
Decontamination Laundry
12/1/1978 0RNL2523
.
Decontamination Laundry
.
1/1/1957 8/23/1963 0RNL2525
.
Research Shops
.
.
12/1/1 978 0RNL2525
Fabrication Department Shops
1/1/1959 8/23/1963 0RNL2528
Low Level Waste Pilot Plant
.
12/1/1978 0RNL2528
Coal Research Laboratory
Radioactive Waste Evaporator Building
12/1/1978 0RNL2531
12/1/1978 0RNL2536
Sewage Research Building
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2550
.
Paymaster's Booth
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2551 .
Millwright Shop
1/1/1951
1/1/i91 0RNL2552
Sheetmetal Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2553
Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2554
Emergency Generator.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2555
Lead Shop
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2556
Warehouse
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL2557
Instrument Department Maintenance Shops
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2558
Fire Equipment Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2559
Change House (White Men)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL256O
Aluminum Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2561
Clock Alley
.
0RNL2564
0RNL2565
0RNL2566
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2563
Storage (Janitors Equipment)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
.
Health Physics Storage
Receiving and Shipping Warehouse
Sterilization House(PotableWaterBottles)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2567
Electric Shop
12/1/1 978 ORNL2567
Craft Support Group Offices
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2568
Automotive Storage
.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2569
Spare Parts Storage
.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2570
Automotive Stores
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
0RNL2572
ORN.L2573 .
Emergency Generator
Septic Tank
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2574
Warehouse
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2575
. Pipe Stores
1/1/1 951
1/111951 0RNL2576
Receiving and Shipping Office
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2577
Not in Use
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2578
Tool Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL2579
Tool Stores
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2580
Riggers Loft
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2581
Tool Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2582
Tool Storage
1/1/1 951
1/111951 QRNL2583
Tool Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2584
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951
1/1./1951 0RNL2585
Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2586
Salvage Yard Office
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2587
Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2588
Storage
C6-LL
X-lO Building Number and Building Name Usting
Begin Date
1/1/1951
Ref Date Building #
Building Name
1/1/1951 0RNL2590
Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2591
Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2592
Storae
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2593
Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2594
Storage
1/111951
1/1/1951 0RNL2595
Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2596
Storage
1/1/195i
1/1/1951 0RNL2597
Storage (Automotive Parts)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
0RNL2598
0RNL2599
Storage (Automotive Parts)
Auto Parts Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL2600
Oil Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2601
Storage (Automotive Parts)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2602
Septic Tank
.111/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2603
Gasoline Station
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2604
Outside Oil Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2605
Transportation Office
1/1 /1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL26O6
Grease Rack
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL2607
Sentry Post#7
1/1/1951
1/1/195 0RNL2608
Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL2609
Sentry Post #3
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL26IO
Mechanical Department Offices
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL26II
Shops
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL26I2
Office (Salvage Yard & Burial Ground)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL26I3
Sentry Post #6
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL26I4
Storage
1/1/1961 8/23/1963 0RNL2621
Tool Stores
12/1/1978 0RNL2621
Tool Stores
12/1/1978 ORN L2628
Fire Protection Maintenance&StorageShOp
12/1/1 978 ORNL263I
Maintenance Equipment Shelter
12/1/1978 0RNL2633
Electrical Material Storage
12/1/1 978 0RNL2634
Maintenance Material Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3000
13.8 kV Substation
12/1/1978 ORNL3000
13.8 kV Substation
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL300I
Pile Building (Graphite Pile)
!L1 !LIi3 ORNL300I
Pile Building (including Graphite Reactor)
-
Graphite Reactor
12/1/1978 ORNL3001
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3002
Graphite Pile Air Filter Building
12/1/1 978 ORNL3002
Filter House
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3003
Graphite Pile Fan House
12/1/1978 ORNL3003
Solid State Accelerator Facility
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3004
Water Demineralization Building
12/1/1978 ORNL3004
Water Demineralizer
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3005
Low Intensity Reactor
1/1/1952 8/23/1963 ORNL3005
LITR (including Reactor)
12/1/1978 ORN L3005
Low-Intensity Testing Reactor
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3006
AreaFldOff, ResShopsSpecialMaterialLab
Research Offices
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3007
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3008
Vault (Storage of Precious Metals)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3009
Pump House (for Bldg. 3010)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3OIO
Shielding Facilities Building
1/1/1960 8/23/1963 ORNL3O1O
BSF II (reactor)
C5-5
X-10 Building Number and Building Name Listing
Begin Date Ref Date
Building #
Building Name
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL3OIO
Bulk Shielding Building
,
.1/1/1951
12/1/1 978
1/1/1951
ORNL3OIO
ORNL3OI I
Bulk Shielding Reactor Facility
Septic Tank (for Bldg. 3010)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3OI2
Roiling Mill (Metallurgy Division)
1/1/1947 8/23/1963 ORNL3OI2
Rolling Mill
12/1/1 978 ORNL3OI2
Rolling Mill
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3OI3
Source Building
12/1/1978 ORNL3O 13
Environmental Processing Laboratory
•0
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3OI4
Isolation Building
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3OI5
Radio Transmitter Building
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3OI6
Emergency Generator
1/1/1952 8/23/1963 ORNL3OI7
Reactor School Laboratory
12/1/1978 ORNL3OI7
Environmental Sciences Laboratory
.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3OI8
Exhaust Stack (for Bldg. 3003)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3OI9
Pilot Plant
1/1/195.1 8/23/1963 ORNL3OI9
Addition to Separations Building
1/1/1956 8/23/1963 ORNL3OI9
High Radiation Level Analytical Facility
-
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 ORNL3OI9
SeparationsBuilding
,__________ 12/1/1978 ORNL3OI9-A
Radiochemical Processing Pilot Plant
12/1/1978 ORNL3OI9-B
High Level Radiation Analytical Lab. (A)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O2O
Exhaust Stack (for Bldg. 3019)
1/1 /1 951
111/1951 ORNL3O2I
Fan House (N.E. Bldg. 3020)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3022
Training Building (TrainingSchoolOffices,
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 0RNL3022
Training School (demolished by, 1963)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3023
North Tank Farm
.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3024
Research Shop
1/1/1947 8/23/1963 0RNL3024
Research Shop
12/1/1978 0RNL3024
Fabrication Dept. -Shop B
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3025
Physics of Solid States Cell Building
1/1/1956 8/23/1963 0RNL3025
Addition to Solid States Lab
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3025
Solid States Lab
12/1/1978 0RNL3025-E
Physical ExaminationHot Cells-A
12/1/1978 0RNL3025-M .
Solid State Division Laboratories
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3026
ByProductProcessingChemicalSeparationLab
By-ProductProcessBuilding&ChemistrySeparatiOnSLab
Radioisotope Development Laboratory-B
1/1/1943 8/23/1963 ORNL:c_
0RNL3026-C
S
12/1/1978
1/1/1945 8/23/1963 0RNL3026-D
DismantlingCellforPowerReactorDevelopmefltEXPerimen
Dismantling & Examination Hot Cells
.
12/1/1978 0RNL3026-D
1/1/1955 8/23/1963 ORNL3027
Source and Special Materials Vault
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3028
Radioisotope Processing Building F
.
12/1/1978 0RNL3028
Radioisotope Production Laboratory-A
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3029
.
Radioisotope Processing Building E
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3029
Radioisotope Area
12/1/1978 0RNL3029 .
Radioisotope Production Laboratory-B
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O3O
.
Radioisotope Processing Building D
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL3O3O
Radioisotope Area
12/1/1978 ORN L3030
Radioisotope Production Laboratory-C
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O3I
Radioisotope Processing Building C
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL3O3I
Radioisotope Area
12/1/1978 ORNL3O3I
Radioisotope Production Laboratory-D
.
1/1 /1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3032
Radioisotope Processing Building B
C6-(o
X-l0 Building Number and Buildirg Name Listing
Begin Date Ref Date Building #
Building Name
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3032,
Radioisotope Area
.
.
12/1/1978 0RNL3032
,
• Radioisotope Production Laboratory-E
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3033
Radioiéotope Processing Building A
.
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3033
Radioisotope Area
.
.
Radioisotope Productidn Laboratory-F
Radioisotope Service Building
1/1/1 951
12/1/197,8
1/1/1951
0RNL3033
0RNL3034
'
1/1/1951 8/231963
12/1/1 978
0RNL3034
0RNL3034
Radioisotope Area
Radioisotope Area Services
.
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3035
Radioisotope Area
.
•
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3036
Decontamination Building
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3036
Radioisotope Area
.
12/1/1978 0RNL3036
Isotope Area Storage&Service Bldg(Temp)
•
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3037
Radioisotope Area Office Building
.1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3037
Radioisotope Area
.
111/1 951
12/1/1 978
1/1/1951
0RNL3037
0RNL3038
Operations Division Offices
Radioisotope Analytical & Packing Bldg.
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL3O38
12/1/1 978 ORNL3O38
,
Radioisotope Area
Radioisotope Laboratory
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3039
Exhaust Stack (Radioisotope Area)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O4O
Housing for Hot Waste Containers
.
1/1/1958 8/23/1963
12/1/1978
0RNL3042
0RNL3042
•
ORR (including Reactor)
Oak Ridge Research Reactor
.
1/1/1955 8/23/1963 0RNL3044
Special MaterlalsMachine Shop
12/1/1978 ORNL3O44
Special Material Machine Shop
1/111963 8/23/1963 ORNL3O47
Radioisotope Development Lab
.
•
12/1/1 978 ORNL3O47
Isotope Technology Building
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O5O
Laboratory Supplies Storage
.
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O5I
Emergency Generator
.
Not In Use
Sentry Post #16B
Decontamination Hut (Tools&MachineShOp)
ORNL3O52
0RNL3054
ORNL3O58
•
1/1/1951 1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3059
Storage (for Bldg. 3012)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O6O
Sentry Post #16
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O6I
Sentry Post #13B
.
111/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3063
Laboratory
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O64
Laboratory
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3065
Library Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O66
Emergency Generator
1/1 /1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3067
Emergency Generator
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O7O
Chemical Separations Storage Gardens
.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3O7I
Machine Shop
•
.
North Field Service Shop
Interim Manipulator Repair Facility
Pumphouse-ORR
Heat Exchanger-ORR
Off-Gas Facility-4000CFM
Reactor Area Equipment Building
Heat Exchanger No.2-ORR
Cooling Tower (increase ORR power to 30MW)
Cooling Tower No. 3-ORR
Reactor Services Field Shop
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3074
12/1/1978 ORNL3O74
12/1/1978 ORNL3O85
12/1/1 978 0RNL3087
12/1/1978 ORNL3O92
12/1/1978 0RNL3095
12/1/1978 ORNL31O2
1/1/1960 8/23/1963 ORNL3IO3
12/1/1978 ORNL3IO3
1/1/1961 8/23/1963 ORNL31O4
X-10 Building Numberand Building Name Listing
t ]
eginDateIRefDate Building#
Building Name
_____ 12/1/1978 ORNL3IO4
West Research Service Center
____
12/111978 ORNL3IO6
Cell Ventilation Filters-4501 4505,4507
_______ 12/1/1978 ORNL3I 10
CellVentilatiOfl Filters-Radioisotope Ar
______ 12/111978ORNL3114
ShockTubeLaboratOly
________ fJiIl978 ORNL3II5
Solid State Offices
1/1/1951 1/1/1951 ORNL3500
Instrument Laboratory. _________...._
1/1/1960 8/23/1963 ORNL3500
Addition to Instrument Lab
1/lI1951 8/23/1963 ORNL3500
Instrument Lab
________ 12/1/1978 ORNL3500
Instrumentation and Controls
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL35OI.
Sewage Pumping Station
1/111951
1/1/1951 0RNL3502
Solvent Operations Office
_________ 12/1/1978 0RNL3502
East Research Service Center
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3503
Solvent Operations
1/1/1948 8/23/1963 0RNL3503
High Radiation Level Chemistry Lab
________
12/1/1978 0RNL3503
High Rad. Level Chem. Eng. Lab.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3504
Waste Research Building (Proposed)
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3504
Health Physics Waste Research Laboratory
_________
12/1/1978 0RNL3504
Environmental Sciences Div. Annex-B
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3505
Metal Recovery Building
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3505
Reactor Fuels Processing Plant
_________ 12/1/1 978 0RNL3505
Fission Product Development Lab. Annex
1/1/1951 1/1/1951 0RNL3506
Chemical Evaporator Building
________ 12/1/1978 0RNL3506
Radioisotope Production Laboratory-G
1/1/1951 1/1/1951 0RNL3507
South Tank Farm
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL3508
Chemical Technology Alpha Laboratory
_________ 12/1/1978 0RNL3508
Chemical Technology Alpha Lab.
i/1/1 951 1/1/1951 0RNL3509
Solvent Operations Waste Transfer
1/1/1 951 1/1/1951 ORNL35IO.
East Pond
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL35II
West Pond
/1/1951 1/1/1951 0RNL3512
Retention Pond
1/1/1951 1/1/1951 0RNL3513
Settling Basin
1/1/1951 1/1/1951 0RNL3514
Incinerator
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3515
Waste Radioisotope Processing
• 1/1/1 958
12/1 /1 978
8/23/1 963
12/1/1978
8/23/1963
1/1/1 957
ORNL35I 5
ORNL35I 7
0RNL3517
ORNL35I 8
12/1/1978 0RNL3518
i7T/1 978 0RNL3523
1/1/1 963
8/23/1963 0RNL3525
12/1/1978
Tiiii918
ORNL3525
ORNL3534
12/1/1 978 0RNL3537
12/1/1978 0RNL3544
12/111978 0RNL3546
1/1/1951 1/1/1951
8/23/1963
Fission Product Pilot Plant
Fission Product Development Lab
Fission Product Development Lab.
Process Waste Treatment Plant
Process Waste Water Treatment Plant
Controls Research
HighRadiationLevelEXami nationLab
High Rad Level Examination Lab.
Liquid Metal Cleaning Facility
Hydrogen and Oxygen Distribution Station
Process Waste Treatment Plant
Modular Office Building for l&C
Chemistry Laboratory
Chemistry Laboratory
Research Laboratory Annex
Chemistry Division Machine Shop
Emergency Generator
Office
0RNL3550
0RNL3550
ORN L3550
0RNL3551
0RNL3552
0RNL3553
_________
12/1/1978
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 1/1/1951
X-10 Building Number and Building Name Listing
Begin Date Ref Date Building #
Building Name
1/ill 95 1/1/1 951ORNL3554
Office
i/1/1951 1/1/1951 0RNL3555
Office
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3556
OFFICE
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3557
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3558
Equipment Storage
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 ORNt3559
Chemistry Library Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/4951 0RNL3560
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3561
Equipment Storage
1/111951
1/1/1951 0RNL3562
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3563
Chemistry Library Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3564
Storage Garden
1/1 /1 951
1/1/1951 ORNL3567
Solvent Operations Spare Parts
1/1/1951
1/1/1 951 ORNL3568
Analytical Laboratory Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3569
Chemicals Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
0RNL3570
Sentry Post #13F
0RNL3571
Change House (Colored Men)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3572
Solvent Storage
—
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3573
Maintenance Shop
Maintenance Shop
Oxygen ard Acetylene Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3574
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3575
1/1/1951 - 1/1/195 0RNL3577
— Stora9e(T.V.A.)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3578
Shelter for lcinerator Attendants
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL579
- Emergency Generator
—_______
Septic Tank
1/1/1951
1/1/I 951 0RNL3580
-
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL3581
Solvent Operations Solvent Storage
Sóivént Storage
•
1211/1978 ORNL358I
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL552
Labc Department Office
1/1/151
1/1/1951 0RNL3583
Temporary Office (for Bldg. 3505)
•
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL3584
Solvent Operations Contaminated Storage
1211/1978 0RNL3584
Contaminated Materials Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL3585
Sentry Post #13
1211/1978 0RNL3587
lnztrument Laboratory Annex
1/1/1952 8/23/1963 0RNL3592
Unit Operations Volatility Lab
1211/1 978 0RNL3592
Unit Operations Volatility Laboratory.
1211/1 978 0RNL3603
Environmental Study Center
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL4000
13.8 kV Substation (Proposed)
1211/1 978 ORNL4000
13.8 kV Substation
1/111 951
1/1/1 951 ORNL4O5O
Field Office
1/1/1 951
1/1/1 951 ORNL4500
Research Laboratory (Under Construction)
1/1/1960 8/231196310RNL4500N
4500N-Wing 5-Administration
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL4500N
Central Research Building
12/1/1 978 ORNL4500N
Central Research and Administration
1/111962 8/23/1963 ORNL4SOOS
CentralResBldgAddit;on(w/comp house & cooling twr
1211/1 978 ORNL4500S
Central Research and Administration
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL45O1
lsotopeDevelopment&UnitOperàtions(UnderC
High Level Radiochemical Lab
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL45O1
12/1/1978 CRNL45O1
High-Level Radiochemical Lab.
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL4502
Portal Building (Proposed)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL4503
Van de Graaff Building (Proposed)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL4504
Cooling Towers (Under Contract)
12/1/1 978_0RNL4505
Experimental_Engineering
X-10 Building Number and Building Name Usting
Begin Date Ref Date Building #
Building Name
1/1/1958
8/23/1963 0RNL4507
HighRadiationLevelChemiCalDeVeloPmefltLab
12/1/197810RNL4507
High-Radiation-Level Chem Develop Lab
8/23/196310RNL4508
Metals and Ceramics Building
12/1/1978ORNL4508
Metals and Ceramics Lab
1/1/1962I
1211/1978 0RNL4509
Compressor House for4500
12/1/1978 ORNL45 10
Cooling Tower for 4500
ORNL451I
Cooling Tower for 4508
12/111978
1/1/1951
1211/1978
ORNLSOO
IPlant Wide Electrical Distribution
ORNL5000
Main Portal
1/1/1951 ORNL5O1-H
154 kV Substation
Emergency Generator
Emergency Generator
Emergency Generator
Emergency Generator
ORNL5O2 #3A
ORNL5O2 #4
ORNL5O2 #5
ORNL5O2
1/1/1951 ORNL5O2 #1
Emergency Generator
1/1/1951 ORNL5O2 #2
Emergency Generator
1/1/1951 ORNLSO2 #3
Emergency Generator
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
Emergency Generator
Emergency Generator
EmergencyGenerator
—________
Gamewall Fire Alarm System
111/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
- 1/1/1951
ORNL5O2 #7
ORNLSO2#8
ORNL5O2#9
ORNL5O3 —
'
1/1/1963
1/1/1952
Auto-call System
Addition( I OMevTandemVandeGraaffAcCeleratOr)
High Voltage Lab
High-Voltage \ccelerato Laboratory
Transuranium Research Laboratory
Electron Spectrometer Facility
Electrical Substation for Bldg 5505
1/1/1951 ORNL5O4
—
8/23/1963 ORN L5500
8/23/1963 ORNL5500
12/1/1978 ORN L5500
12/1/1 978 0RNL5505
12/1/1978 0RNL5507
12/1/1978 0RNL5554
1/1/1963 8/23/1963 ORN L6000
OakRidgeRelativisticlSOChrOflOUSCYClOtrOfl
12/1/1978 ORN L6000
OakRidgelsochronousuyClOtrofl(ORIC)&HOlif
12/1/1978 ORNL600I
Cooling Tower for Bldg. 6000
12/1/1978ORNL6002A
Oak Ridge Linear Accelerator OfficeAnnex
12/1/1978 ORNL6002B
Oak Ridge Linear Accelerator OfficeAnnex
12/1/1978 ORNL6003
Modular Building for Offices
12/1/1978ORNL6O05_____ Gas Compressor House for Bldg 6000
—_____
12/1/1978 ORN L60 10
OakRtdgeElectronLInearAccelerator(ORELA)
12/1/1978 0RNL6025
Neutron Physics Office-Lab Building
1/1/1951 ORNL6O3
Roads and Walkways - Topography
1/1/1951 ORNL6O4
Truck Scales
1/1/1951 ORNL6O5
Fences
1/1/1951 ORNL6O6-A
Burial Ground #1
1/1/1951 ORNL6O6-B
Burial Ground #2
1/1/1951 ORNL6O6-C
Burial Ground #3
1/1/1951 ORNL614-6
Portal Building (Proposed)
1/1/1951 ORNL614-7
Portal Building (Proposed)
1/1/1951 0RNL625-C
SepticTank
1/1/1951 0RNL625-D
Septic Tank
1/1/1951 0RNL625-E
Septic Tank
1/1/1951 0RNL625-F
Septic Tank
1/1/1951 0RNL626-B
Incinerator
1/1/1951 0RNL634
U.S. Weather Bureau
C-(O
X-10 Building Number and Building Name Listing
•
,'
.
Garage & Utility Shop (former construction
Garage and Utility Shop
Welding and Brazing Shop
Lead Shop
Paint Stores
Paint Shop
Carpenter Shop
Clock Alley (Sentry Post#4)
Fegin Date Ref Date Building#
Building Name
12/1/1978 ORNL7000
Septic Tank
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL700I
General Stores (former constrUction headquarters)
12/1/1 978 ORNL7001
General Stores
'
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORNL7002
12/1/1 978 ORNL7002
12/1/1978 ORNL7003
12/1/1 978 0RNL7005
12/1/1978 ORNL7006
12/1/1 978 ORNL7007
12/1/1 978 ORNL7009
1/1/1951 ORNL7OI-A
,
Clock Alley
Sentry Post #16B
Sentry Post #2
Sentry Post #12
Sentry Post #6
Sentry Post #2B________________________________
Sentry Post#16
Sentry Post#11C
Notin Use
Sentry Post #13F
ORNL7O1-C
ORNL7OI-D
ORNL7OI-E
ORNL7QI-F
ORNL7OI-G
ORNL7OI-H
ORNL7O1-K
ORNL7O1-L
ORNL7OI-M
ORNL7OI-P
1/1/1951 ORNL7OI-B
H Sentry Post#11
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL7OI-Q
Sentry Post#13B
12/1/1978
8/23/1963
ORNL7OIO
ORNL7OI2
Dry Lumber Storage
Central Machine Shop
.
1/1/1953
1211/1978 ORNL7OI2
Central Mechanical Shors
12/1/1978 ORNL7OI3
Acid, Chemical, Flammable Liquid Storage
1/1/1959 8/23/1963 ORNL7OI8
Salvage Yard Facility
12/1/1978
1/1/1951
ORNL7OI8
ORNL7O3-A
Annex
Administration Building
-__________
1/1/1951 ORNL7O3-A ANNE Administration Building
1/1/1951 ORNL7O3-B
SEE 2557, 2610, 2611
1/1/1951 ORNL7O3-C
Administration and Engineering Bldg
1/1/1951 ORNL7O4-A
Temporary Office (for Bldg. 3505)
1/1/1951 ORNL7O5
Accelerator_Buildinq
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-A
Chemistry Laboratory
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-A1
Office
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-A2
Office
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-A3
Office
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-A4
OFFICE
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AB
Oxygen and Acetylene Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AC I
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AC2
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AC3
Chemistry Library Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AC4
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AC5
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL706-AC6
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AD
Storage Garden
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AE
Solvent Operations Spare Parts
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-AF
Chemistry Library Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-B
Physics Laboratory
cS-U
X-1O Building Number and Buildin Name Listing
'Begin Date Ref Date Building #
Building Name
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-B4
Storage (Chemicals & Chemical Equipment)
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-BB
Storage (Chemicals & Chemical Equipment)
1/1951 ORNL7O6-BC
Storage (Chemicals & Chemical Equipment)
1/1/1951 ORN L706-C
ByproductProcessingChem.SeP. Lab
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-CA
Chemical Separations Storage Gardens
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-D
ByProductProbessingChem.Sep.Lab
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-F
Analytical_Laboratory_Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-G
Source Building
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-HB
Solvent_Operations
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-HC
Solvent Operations Waste Transfer
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-HD
Solvent Operations_Office
1/1/1951 ORNL7O6-J
Library Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7O7-A
Change House (Colored Men)
1/1/1951 ORNL7O7-B
Change House (Colored Women)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
ORNL7O7-D
Change House (White Men)
ORNL7O7-E
:Change House (Colored Men)
1/1/1951 ORNL7O7-F
Storage (Janitors Equipment)
1211/1978 ORNL7O7O
Storage Shed
1/1/1951 ORNL7O8
Reactor Sôhool
-________________________
1/1/1951 ORNL7O8-D
Office (Salvage Yard & Buri Ground)
-— —_______
1/1/1951 ORNL71O-A
Shelter for icinerator Attendants
I
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
ORNL71O-B
Paymaster Booth
0RNL713-A
General Stores
ORNL7I3-AE
[Storage (Chemicals & Chemical Equipment)
1/1/1951 ORNL7I3-AF
Pickling and Ladder Dipping Vats
1/1/1951 ORNL7I3-AG
Pipe Cutting Shop
—___________
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
ORNL7I3-B
Warehouse
ORNL7I3-C
Electric Shop
ORNL7I3-DD
Lumber & Spare Parts, Cylinder Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL7I3-E
IReceiving and Shipping Warehouse
1/1/1951 ORNL7I 3-EE
Acid Storage
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
ORNL713-F
Pipe Stores
ORNL7I 3-G
Automotive Storage
ORNL7I 3-GA
Automotive Stores
1/1 /1 951 ORNL71 3-H
1/1/1951 ORNL713-J
Storage
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7I3-L
StatiOnary Storage (Bethel Church)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
ORNL713-M
Chemicals Storage
ORNL7I3-O
Aluminum Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7I3-P
Warehouse
1/1/1951 ORNL713-Q
Solvent Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL713-R
Spare Parts Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL713-S
Oil Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7 1 3-T
Solvent Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL713-UA
SEE 3581, 3584
1/1/1951 ORNL713-V
Outside Oil Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL713-W
Not In Use
1/1/1951 ORNL713-X
Health Physics Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL713-Y
Storage (for Bldg. 3012)
1/1/1951 ORNL715
Flag Pole
1/1/1951 ORNL717-A
Central Shops
Cs- J.
X-10 Building Number and Building Name Listing
Begin Date i Ref Date Building #
Building Name
__________
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-B
Tool and Pipe Stores, Timekeepers
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-BA
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL717-BB
Research Shop
1/1/1951 ORNL71 7-C
Carpenter Shop
1/1/1951 ORNL717-D
Paint Shop
,
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-E
Tool Stores
,
1/1/1951 ORNL717-EA
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL717-EB
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-EC
Tool Storage
'
'
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-ED
Storage
•
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-EE
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL717-EF
Paint Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL717-EG
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL717-EH
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-El
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL717-EJ
Storage
'
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-F
Receiving and Shipping Office
1/1/1951 ORNL717-G
Transportation Office
1/1/1951 ORNL717-H
Tool Storage
111/1951 ORNL717-HA
Tool Storage
Tool Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-HB
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-I
Lead Shop
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-J
Millwright Shop
1/1/1951 ORNL717-K
Sheetmetal Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-L
Rigg€s Loft
1/1/1951 ORNL717-N
Salvage Yard Office
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-P
Chemistry Division Machine Shop
1/1/1951 ORNL717-Q
Maintenance Shop
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-QA
Maintenance Shop
1/1/1951 ORNL7I 7-R
Equipment Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL7I7-T
Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL71 7-U
Sterilization House(PotableWaterBottles)
1/1/1951 ORNL7I9-A
SEE 2012, 2013
1/1/1951 ORNL719-B
Urine Analysis Laboratory
1/1/1951 ORNL72O
Guard Headquarters and Fire Headquarters
1/1/1951 ORNL72O-A
Fire Equipment Storage
1/1/1951 ORNL72I
Radio Transmitter Building
1/1/1951 0RNL723
Laundry
1/1/1951 0RNL723-A
Checking Room (for Bldg. 2515)
1/1/1951 0RNL723-B
Sewing Room (for Bldg. 2515)
1/1/1951 0RNL724-B
Gasoline Station
1/1/1951 ORNL725
Garage
1/1/1951 0RNL725-A
Grease Rack
1/1/1951 ORNL725-B
Storage (Automotive Parts)
1/1/1951 0RNL725-C
Storage (Automotive Parts)
1/1/1951 0RNL725-D
Storage (Automotive Parts)
1/1/1951 0RNL725-E
Auto Parts Storage
1/1/1951 0RNL735-A
Safety Department
1/1/1951 0RNL735-B
Training Building (TrainingSchoolOffices
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
0RNL745-A
0RNL745-B
Pistol Range
Pistol
C5- (3
X-10 Building Number and Building Name Listing
Begin Date Ref Date Building #
Building Name
1/1/1951 ORNL9O5
Radioisotope Processing Building A
1/1/1951 ORNL9O6
Radioisotope Processing Building B
j 1/1/1951jORNL9O7
Radioisotope Processing Building C
1/1/195110RN.L908
Radioisotope Processing Building D
1/1/1951 ORNL9O9
Radioisotope Processing Building E
1/1/1951 ORNL91O
Radioisotope Processing Building F
1211/1978 ORNL91O2-1
Eng. Tech. Reports Office (at Y-1 2)
12/1/1978 ORNL91O2-2
Eng._Tech._Offices_(atY-12)
12/1/1978 ORNL91O4-1
Eng._Tech._Offices_(atY-12)
12/1/1978 ORNL91O4-2
ComputerSciences for FusionEnergy (Y-12)
12/1/1978 ORN L9 104-3
FusionEnergyCommunicatiOnsCtr./Eflg. (Y-1 2
12/1/1 978 ORNL91O5
Engineering_Offices_(at_'(-12)
1/1/1951 ORNL911
Exhaust Stack (Radioisotope Area)
1/1/1951 ORNL912
Housing for Hot Waste Containers
1/1/1962 8/23/1963 ORNL92O1-2
Project Sherwood Relocation
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 ORN L9201 -2
Thermonuclear (Y-1 2 transfer)
12/1/1978 ORN L9201 -2
FusionEriergyAdmin.&ReséarchBldg. (Y-1 2)
1/1/1950 8/23/1963 ORN L920 1-3
Reactoroesign&EnginéerDevelopment (Y-1 2 transfer)
12/1/1978 ORNL92O1-3
Eng.Tech.Admin.&Research8ldg. (at '(-12)
1/1/1950 8/23/1963 0RNL9204-1
Reactor Experimental Engineering ('(-12 transfer)
1/1/1951
12/1/1978 ORNL92O4-1
Eng.Tech./FusionEnergyOffice&Lah. ('(-12)
8/23/1963 ORNL92O4-3
Electronuclear(Y-12 transfer)
1/1/1961
8/23/1963
12/1/1978
0RNL9204-3
Expansion of Stable Isotope Production Facilities
ORNL92O4-3
Isotope Separations (atY-12)
1/1/1951 -- 1/1/1951 0RNL9207
Biology Laboratory —______________________________
1/1/1962 8/23/1963 ORNL92O7
BiologyAdditions-Biochemistry Lab
1/1/1963
1/1/1961
8/23/1963 0RNL9207
BiologyAdditions-CeD Physiology Lab
8/23/1963 0RNL9207
BiologyAdditions-ChemicalProtectiOfl&lmmunogenetic
8/23/1963 0RNL9207
BiologyAdditions-LowLevelRadiationExperimefltal Fac
8/23/1963 LORNL92O7
BiologyAdditions-MammalianRadiatiOfll njury&Protecti
8/23/1963' ORN L9207
BiologyAdditions-Pathology&PhysiolgyLab
8/23/1963 0RNL9207
.BiologyResearchFacilities (taken from Y12)
1/1/1962
1/1/1960
1/1/1962
1/1/1947
12/1/1 978 0RNL9207
Biology Admin and Research Bldg.(Y-12)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 QRNL92O8
Shops (Not in Use)
12/1/1978 0RNL9208
Biolocy Research Lab. (at '(-12)
Animal Farm
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 ORNL921O
1/1/1947 8/23/1963 ORNL921O
BiologyResearchFacilities (taken from '(-12)
1/1/1963 8/23/1963 ORNL921O
Mammalian Genetics Lab
12/1/1978 ORNL921O
Biology Research Lab. (atY-12)
12/1/1978 ORNL92II
Biology Research Lab. (atY-12)
1/1/1950 8/23/1963 ORNL92I3
Criticality Lab (Y-12 transfer)
12/1/1978 ORNL922O
Virus Control Lab. (at '(-12)
12/1/1978 ORNL9224
Biology Research Lab. (atY-12)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL9409-19
Cooling Towers
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9621
Acid Reclaiming
1/1/1950 8/23/1963 0RNL9704-1
Reactor Division Offices (Y-12 transfer)
12/1 /1 978 0RNL9704-1
Computer Sciences for Biology (at '(-12)
12/1/1978 ORNL971 1-1
'(-12 Tech.LibraryNucl.Safetylnfo.OffiCe
1/1/1951
1/1/1951
8/23/1963 ORNL971I-4
Technical Library - Ecology Lab (Y-12 transfer)
1/1/1951 0RNL9723-22
Biology Laboratory
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9723-23
Present Shop
C5- IS
X-1O Building Number and Building Name Listing
Begin Date Ref Date
Building #
Building Name
1/1/19511 8/23/1963 0RNL973 I
Stable Isotope Separations (Y-1 2 transfer)
1/1/1951 L
1/1/1951
8/23l1963ORNL9734
8l23/1963ORNL9735
Spectroscopy Research Lab (Y-12 transfer)
Mass Spectrometer Lab (Y-12 transfer)
12/1/1978 0RNL9735
Mass Spectrometiy Lab. (at Y-1 2)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL9743-2
Patrol Headquarters
1211/1978 0RNL9743-2
Animal Facility (atY-12).
1211/1978 0RNL9764
Nuclear Safety Information Center (Y12)
1/1/1951 8/23/1963 0RNL9766
Ceramic Lab - Photographic Lab (Y-12 transfer)
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL9768
Stack for Bldg. 9769
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9769
Old Incinerator
1211/1978 0RNL9769
Biology Research Lab. (at Y-12)
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9770-1
Pump House
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9770-2
Pump House
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL9770-3
Pump House
1/1/1 951
1/1/1951 0RNL9770-4
Pump House
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9929-1
Warehouse
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9929-2
Warehouse
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9929-3
Warehouse
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 0RNL9966
Warehouse
1/1/1951
1/1/1951 CaRNL9982
Head House (Includes Greenhouses)
1/1 /1 951
12il/978 ORNL9982
Greenhouse (atY-12)
—_____
1/1/1951 0RNL9986
Rabbit Hutch
8/23/1963 ORNLCHEM
Chemistry Division
8/23/1 963 ORNLFUS
Fusion Research
8/23/1 963 ORNLMED
Medical Division
8/23/1 963 ORNLMETAL
Metallurgy
—.
8/23/1963 ORNLPHYS
Physs Research ar.d Development
8/23/1 963 ORNLRADISO
Radioisotope Division
8/23/1 963 ORNLSEP
Separatcns Development Division
8/23/1963 ORNLSSTATE
Solid St:te Physics
1/1/1951 ORNLY-12
SEE811 3140 9207 9208 9210 9621 9723-22
C-I(o
Appendix D
D-1
Y-12 H&S Report Air Sampling Summary
41 
343 
17 
18.4 
Samples 
%>MPL 
Comment 
Trichloroethylene, Air 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
2 
200ppm 
194 
40 
- 
3 
200ppm 
14 
0 
1 
2 
200ppm 
200ppm 
1955 
1 — 
200ppm 
Operational 
9204-4 
24 
— 
0 
1954 
2 
200ppm 
Operational 
9212 
2 
50 
1954 
2 
200ppm 
Operational 
9204-4 
4 
0 
- 
1955 
1 — - 
200ppm 
Operational 
9212 
75 
0 
1956 
1 
200ppm. 
22 
0 
- 
— 
1956 
1956 
1956 
4 
200ppm 
52 
17 
- 
1957 
1957 
1957 
3 
200ppm 
0 
0 
1957 
4 
200ppm 
0 
0 
1959 
3 
200ppm 
0 
0 
1959 
4 
200ppm — 
10 
0 
1960 
1 
200ppm 
32 
— 
9.4 
1960 
2 
200ppm 
11 
0 
1960 
3 
200ppm 
0 
o- 
- 
Year 
0uarter Max Allowable 
Concentrations Ty! p!J 
a 
r of 
1954 
1 
200ppm 
- Operational 
9212 
3 
33 
— 1954 
4 
200ppm 
Operational 
9212 
20 
0 
— 1955 
2 
200ppm — 
Operational 
9204-4 
0 
0 
- 
. 
17 
17.6 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Perchioroethylene, Air 
200ppm 
31 
0 
200ppm 
200ppm 
1 
2 
3 
2 
3 
200pprn 
200ppm 
1956 
1956 
1956 
37 
28 
4 
3 
1956 
4 
200ppm 
19 
16 
1957 
1 
200ppm 
27 
26 
1957 
2 
200ppm 
235 
6.4 
1957 
3 
200ppm 
422 
19.9 
1957 
4 
200ppm 
232 
2.5 
1958 
1 
200ppm 
189 
14.8 
1958 
1958 
118 
73 
29.6 
8.2 
1958 
4 
200ppm 
89 
9 
1959 
1 
200ppm 
47 
14.9 
1959 
1959 
2 
3 
200ppm 
200ppm 
44 
18 
205 
22.2 
1959 
4 
200ppm 
57 
31.6 
1960 
1 
200ppm 
85 
— 52 
16.5 
21.15 
1960 
2 
200ppm 
1960 
1960 
3 
200ppm 
167 
14.37 
4 
200ppm 
- 
49 
14.29 
1961 
— 
1 
200ppm 
41 
7.3 
1961 
2 
200ppm 
1961 
1961 
3 
200ppm 
82 
5 
no. aboveMAC 
4 
lOOppm 
293 
4 
no. above MAC 
1962 
1 
lOOppm 
233 
25 
no. aboveMAC 
1962 
2 
lOOppm 
10 
5 
no. above MAC 
1962 
3 
1 Ooppm 
42 
- 
3 
no. above MAC 
1962 
4 
lOOppm 
113 
12 
no. above MAC 
1963 
1 
lOOppm 
261 
53 
no. aboveMAC 
- Year 
Quarter 
Mx Allowable Type of Sample Location Number of % > MPL 
Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
- 
0 
8 
20 
.l5mgIM3 
.l5mgIM3 
.l5mgIM3 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Lead, Air 
3 
.l5mg/M3 
6 
0 
4 
1 
2 
3 
.2OmgIM3 
33 
24.2 
4 
Year 
Quarter Max Allowable Number of % > MPL Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
1956 
1956 
1957 
1957 
0 
0 
1957 
1957 
1958 
1 
.2OmgIM3 
200ugIM3 
86 
11 
2.3 
0 
1958 
2 
200ug/M3 
100 
12 
1958 
3 
200ug/M3 
5 
0 
1958 
4 
200ugIM3 
12 
41.7 
1 959 
1 
200ug/M3 
0 
0 
1 959 
2 
200ug/M3 
32 
0 
1959 
3 
200ug/M3 
13 
0 
1959 
4 
200ug/M3 
0 
0 
14 
0 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
Cyanide, Air 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
10 ppm 
10 ppm 
1 
—- 3 
4 
— 
10 ppm 
10 ppm 
— 
1955 
4 
5.OmgIM3 
Breathing Zone 
9212 
15 
0 
1956 
1 
loppm 
41 
0 
HydrogenCyanide 
1956 
2 
10 ppm 
51 
0 
Hydrogen_Cyanide 
1956 
3 
10 ppm 
34 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1956 
1957 
4 
61 
23 
0 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1957 
2 
10 ppm 
13 
- 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1957 
3 
10 ppm 
0 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1957 
4 
10 ppm 
36 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1958 
1 
10 ppm 
30 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1958 
2 
10 ppm 
— 
32 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
— 
1958 
3 
10 ppm 
22 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1958 
4 
10 ppm 
29 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1959 
1 
10 ppm 
:_______ 
22__ 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1959 
2 
10 ppm 
12 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1959 
1959 
3 
10 ppm 
30 
0 
Cyanide 
4 
10 ppm 
56 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
- 
1960 
1 
10 ppm 
42 
— 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1960 
2 - 
10 ppm 
48 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1960 
1960 
1961 
1 
10 ppm 
—___________ 
16 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1961 
2 
10 ppm 
16 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1961 
3 
10 ppm 
16 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1961 
4 
10 ppm 
. 
. 
93 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1962 
1 
10 ppm 
49 
1 
obtained during controlled exp. 
1962 
2 
10 ppm 
0 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
1962 
3 
10 ppm 
11 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
Year Quarter 
Max Allowable Type of Sample 
Location Number of %> MPL 
Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
1953 
1 
5.Omg/M3 
Operational 
Y-12 
4 
0 
1955 
1 
5.OmgIM3 
Operational 
9212 
0 
1955 
2 
5.Omg/M3 
Operational 
9212 
0 
0 
1955 
3 
50mg/M3 
Operational 
9212 
20 
0 
1955 
4 
5.Omg/M3 
General Air 
9212 
15 
0 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Cyanide, Air 
Year Quarter j Max Allowable Type of Sample Location NumberJ % > MPL 
Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
1962 
4 
10 ppm 
43 
80 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
— 
1963 
1 
10 ppm 
0 
Hydrogen Cyanide 
Location Number of 
Samples 
%> MPL Comment 
_____________ 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Fluoride, Air 
2.5mgIM3 
Operational 
Y-12 
8 
0 
25mgIM3 
2.5mgIM3 
Operational 
Operational 
9201-3 
9201-3 
12 
59 
2 
1 
2 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable 
Concentrations 
Type of Sample 
1953 
1954 
1954 
1954 
4 
2.5mgIM3 
Operational 
9766 
4 
0 
1955 
1 
Operational 
Stack 
0 
1955 
1 
2.5mg/M3 
Operational 
Outside 
11 
0 
1955 
2 
Operational 
Stack 
0 - 
0 
1955 
2 
2.5mg/M3 
Operational 
Outside 
0 
0 
1955 
3 
2.5mg/M3 
Breathing Zone 
9211 
0 
1956 
1 
2.5mg/M3 
9 
0 
dust 
1956 
2 
2.5mgJM3 
0 
dust 
1956 
3 
2.5mg/M3 
0 
0 
dust 
1956 
4 
2.5mg/M3 
6 
0 
dust 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Cadmium, Air 
Year 
Quarter Max Allowable Type of Sample Location Number of % > MPL Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
1954 
4 
.lmg/M3 
Operational 
9212 
12 
0 
1955 
1 
.lmg/M3 
Operational 
9212 
12 
0 
1955 — 
2 
— 
.lmg/M3 
Operational 
9212 
0 
0 
1955 
4 
.lmg/M3 
Breathing Zone 
9212 
15 
4 
1956 
1 
lOOugIM3 
14 
28 
1956 
1956 
2 
3 
lOOugIM3 
lOOug/M3 
0 
20 
10 
1956 
4 
lOOug/M3 
26 
0 
1957 
1 
lOOug/M3 
21 
24 
1957 
2 
lOOug/M3 
6 
0 
1957 
3 
lOOug/M3 
28 
28.6 
1957 
4 
lOOug/M3 
—__________ 
- 
0 
0 
100 
% > MPL Comment 
SamplelLocation Number of 
Samples 
Y-12 
10 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Silica, Air 
5mppci 
Operational 
Max Allowable Type of 
Concentrations 
2 
Quarter 
Year 
1953 
Y-12 lH/HP Repon ummary Results 
Plutonium, Air 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable Type of Sample Location Number of % > MPL Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
1954 
4 
9d/m/M3 
General Air 
9205 
150 
1 
1955 
1 
9d/m/M3 
General Air 
9205 
165 
0 
1955 
2 
9d/m/M3 
General Air 
9205 
60 
<1 
1955 
3 
9d/m/M3 
Operational - 
9205 
0 
1955 
3 
9d/m/M3 
General Air 
9995 
100 
1 
1955 
3 
9d/m/M3 
Operational 
9995 
25 
8 
1955 
4 
6.3x10-5ug/M3 
General Air 
9995 
130 
0 
1955 
4 
6.3x10-5ug/M3 
Operational 
9995 
0 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary 
Results 
Lithium, Air 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable Type of Samç 
Location 
Number of 
% > MPL 
Comment 
- 
Concentrations 
Samples 
- 
- 
1953 
4 
General Air 
9204-4 
10 
1954 
1 
35ug1M3 
General Air 
9204-4 
7 
14 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1954 
2 
35ug/M3 
General Air 
9704-4 
101 
70 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1954 
4 
35ug/M3 
General Air 
Y-12 
5 
0 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1955 
1 
35ug/M3 
Operational 
9204-2 
5 
0 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1955 
2 
35ug/M3 
Operational 
9204-2 
135 
29 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1955 
3 
35ug/M3 
Operational 
Areas 
50 
0 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1955 
4 
35ug/M3 
Stack 
Alloy Areas 
50 
0 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1955 
4 
35ug/M3 
Outdoors 
Y-12 
3 
0 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1956 
1 
35ug/M3 
7 
28 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
1956 
2 
35ug/M3 
0 
MPL Based on Irritation Level 
6 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Beryllium, Air 
2.Oug/M3 
2.OugIM3 
80 
87 
64 
2.Oug/M3 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable Type of Sampi 
Concentrations 
Location 
Number of 
% > MPL 
Comment 
— 
. 
Samples 
1952 
1952 
1952 
1 
0 
2.Oug/M3 
1952 
1953 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
2 Oug/M3 
Operational 
Y-12____ 
71 
27 
4 
7 
1953 
1953 
1953 
1 
2 Oug/M3 
General Air 
Y-12 
458 
0 
2 
2 Oug/M3 
Operational 
Y-12 
16 
0 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
Operational 
Y-12 
35 
<1 
1953 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
General Air 
Y-12 
88 
0 
- 
1953 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
General Air 
9766 
141 
0 
: 
1953 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
Operational 
9766 
30 
- 
0 
1954 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
General Air 
9766 
61 
0 
1954 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
Operational 
9766 
5 
0 
1954 
2 
20ug/M3 
General Air 
9766 
52 
0 
1954 
2 
2.Oug/M3 
OperaUona 
9766 
1 
0 
- 
1954 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
General Air 
9766 
150 
0 
1955 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
General Air 
9766 
- 
120 
0 
1955 
1 
2.OugIM3 
Operational 
9766 
3 
0 
1955 
2 
2 Oug/M3 
General Air 
9766 
189 
0 
1955 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
General Air 
9766 
156 
0 
1955 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
Breathing Zone 
9766 
4 
- 0 
Operational BZ 
1955 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
Operational 
9734-2 
3 
0 
- 
1955 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
General Air 
9766 
125 
0 
1955 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
Breathing Zone 
9766 
10 
0 
1955 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
0 
1956 
1 
2.OugIM3 
423 
0 
1956 
2 
2.Oug/M3 
233 
0 
1956 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
. 
182 
2 - 
1956 
4 
2 Oug/M3 
329 
0 
1957 
1 
20ug/M3 
423 
0 
1957 
1957 
2 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
562 
543 
1.6 
0 
1957 
4 
706 
0 
0.06 
006 
0.57 
8952 
9116 
9203 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Beryllium, Air 
2.OugIM3 
2OugIM3 
2.Oug/M3 
1 
2 
3 
1958 
2 — 
2.Oug/M3 
0 
1958 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
3195 
0 
1958 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
3248 
0.3 
1959 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
4156 
0.05 
1959 
2 
2Oug/M3 
8806 
02 
1959 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
9462 
8787 
0.08 
1959 
4 
2.OugIM3 
0.02 
1960 
1960 
1960 
1960 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
8911 
0.91 
1961 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
8398 
—— 
0.9 
1961 
2 
2.Oug/M3 
12026 
3.38 
1961 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
14344 
1476 
No. above MAC 
1961 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
15609 
1323 
No. above MAC 
1962 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
12630 
913 
No. above MAC 
1962 
2 
2.Oug/M3 
9495 
288 
No. above MAC 
1962 
1962 
3 
2.Oug/M3 
9923 
81 
No. above MAC 
4 
2.Oug/M3 
9654 
6380 
225 
46 
No. above MAC 
No. above MAC 
1963 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable Type of Sampi 
Location 
Number of 
%> MPL 
Comment - — 
Concentrations 
Samples 
- 
— 1958 
1 
2.Oug/M3 
998 
1849 
0 
- 
1752 
33 
1518 
100 
19 
9201-2 
9204-4 
9204-4 
Y-12 IH/HP reports Summary Reports 
Mercury, Air 
Spot General Air 
Spot General Air 
ous Reading Gen 
0 lmg/M3 
0 lmg/M3 
0.lmg/M3 
3 
3 
3 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable 
Concentrations 
Type of Sample 
Location 
Number of 
Samples 
% > MPL 
Comment 
1952 
0 1 mgIM3 - 
19 
1952 
0.lmg/M3 
7 
1952 
0.lmg/M3 
14 
1952 
0.lmg/M3 
34 
1952 
0.lmg/M3 
79 
48 
-. 
1953 
'1 
0.lmg/M3 
Operational 
Y-12 
15 
1953 
— 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
General Air 
Y-12 
3248- 
20 
1953 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
Operational 
Y-12 
57 
16 
1953 
1953 
2 
3 
0lmg/M3 
0 lmg/M3 
General Air 
Spot General Air 
Y-12 
9202 
3266 
797 
31 
71 
1953 
1953 
1953 
0 
1953 
4 
0.1 mg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9204-4 
2832 
11 
1953 
4 
0 lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9204-4 
915 
22 
1953 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-2 
1797 
48 
1953 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9201-2 
9 
30 
• 
1953 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9202 
1216 
- 
87 
1953 
4 
Duct 
9204-4 
- 
10 
1954 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9204-4 
648 
- 
4 
- 
1954 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9204-4 
1044 
- 
12 
- 
1954 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen9204-4 — 
1307 
17 
1954 
1 
0.1 mg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-2 
1196 
57 
.. 
1954 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
92012 
1954 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9202 
1502 
66 
1954 
1 
Duct 
9204-4 
1954 
2 
0,lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9204-4 
1851 
30 
1954 
— 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
ousReadingGen 
9204-4 
1136 
21 
1954 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
spot General Air 
9201-2 
1750 
18 
1954 
2 
0 lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9201-2 
1954 
2 
0.lmgJM3 
Spot General Air 
9202 
227 
- 
- 
24 
1954 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
Y-12 
60 
2 
1954 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9204-4 
- 
2890 
. 
6 
- 
10 
52 
73 
2149 
22 
25 
16 
2680 
9201-2 
9201-2 
Y-12 
9204-4 
9204-4 
Y-12 IH/HP reports ummary Reports 
Mercury, Air 
Spot General Air 
ous Reading Gen 
Spot General Air 
Duct 
Spot General Air 
Spot General Air 
ous Reading Gen 
9204-4 - 
9204-4 
4600 
825 
13 
33 
0.lmg/M3 
0.lmg/M3 
0 lmgIM3 
0lmgIM3 
0.lmg/M3 
0.lmg/M3 
0.lmg/M3 
0.lmg/M3 
1 
4 
4 
4 
4 
3 
3 
3 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Aflowable Type of Sample 
Location 
Number of 
% > MPL 
Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
- 
1954 
1954 
1954 
1954 
1955 
1955 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-4 
— 
17950 
74 
1955 
1955 
4 
4 
0 lmg/M3 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-5 
25900 
74 
ous Reading Gen 
9201-5 
175 
- 
48- 
1955 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9204-4 
I 
3200 
1-1 
- 
- 
6 
1955 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9204-4 
1204 
18 
1955 
— 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-2 
- 
2028 
54 
1955 
1 
0.lmgIM3 
OUS_Reading Gen 
9201-2 
9 
78 
1955 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9202 
0 
1955 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-5 
0 
1955 
1 
0 lmg/M3 us Reading Gen 
9201-5 
0 
1955 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air -12,Other Area 
0 
1955 
1 
0 lmg/M3 
Operatloildl r)uct 
9204-4 
16 
0 
1955 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-2 
2775 
40 
1955 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9201-2 
0 
0 
1955 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
8201-5 
14985 
45 
1955 
1955 
2 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
Spot General Air 
231-5 
9202 
785 
0 
50 
0 
1955 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9204-4 
2200 
8 
- 
1955 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9204-4 
700 
37 
— 
1955 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air -12, Other Area 
0 
0 
1955 
3 
0.lmg/M3 — Spot General Air 
9201-2 
2225 
19 
1955 
3 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-4 
12250 
83 
1955 
3 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-5 
1170 
- 
84 
1955 
3 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9201-5 
575 
68 
1955 
1955 
1955 
Spot General Air -12, Other Area 
3100 
25 
— 
1955 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot General Air 
9201-2 
- 2930 
44 
. 
3.5 
- 
22a - - No. above MAC 
86126 
18 
73185 
77078 
9 
12345 
11746 
Y-12 IH/HP reports Summary Reports 
Mercury, Air 
0.lmg/M3 
0 lmgIM3 
0.lmg/M3 
lOOug/M3 
1 
3 
4 
3 
lOOug/M3 
lOOug/M3 
1 
2 
lOOug/M3 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable Type of Sample 
Location 
Number of 
% > MPL 
Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
- 
- 
1955 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
ous Reading Gen 
9204-4 
735 
18 
1955 
1956 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
Spot GeneralAir -12, Other Area 
1000 
26 
1 
0.lmg/M3 
73488 
38 
1956 
2 
— 0.lmgIM3 
87942 
19 
1956 
1956 
1957 — 
4.1 
1957 
2 
0.lmg/M3 
73856 
2.1 
1957 
3 — 0.lmg/M3 
58483 
1.9 
1957 
4 
0.lmg/M3 
40507 
2.2 
1958 
1 
lOOug/M3 
42742 
2.05 
1958 
2 
lOOug/M3 
26468 
3.25 
1958 
3 
lOOug/M3 
25557 
6.6 
1958 
4 
lOOug/M3 
24064 
3.8 
1959 
1 
lOOug/M3 
22289 
7.6 
1959 
1959 
2 
17750 
12878 
10.5 
66 
1959 
4 
lOOug/M3 
11444 
4.8 
1960 
1960 
6.01 
1960 
3 
lOOug/M3 
11334 
6.1 
1960 — 
4 
lOOug/M3 
11529 
3.45 
1961 
1 
lOOug/M3 
11217 
3.08 
- 
0.94 
1961 
3 
lOOug/M3 
5029 
- 
42 
No. above MAC 
1961 
2 
lOOug/M3 
. 
9813 
1961 
3 
lOOug/M3 
. 
4591 
80 
No. above MAC 
1962 
1 
lOOug/M3 
5342 
87 
No. above MAC 
1962 
2 
.lOmg/M3. 
4261 
94 
No. above MAC 
1962 
3 
.lOmg/M3 
-4120 
125 
No. above MAC 
1962 
4 
.lOmg/M3 
: 
3616 
176 
No. above MAC 
1963 
1 
.lOmg/M3 
4962 
Mercury Monthly, Ar 
Y-12 Report Summary Results 
9201-5 
10838 
30 
0.1 
Hand Written #Taken 
7 
9201-4 
10676 
6 
0.06 
Hand Written#Taken 
7 
11 
9201-5 
9201-4 
9052 
85 
77 
0 23 
021 
021 
10 
Year 
Month 
Location 
Number of Samples % > MPL Air Concentration mgIM3 
Comments 
1955 
7 
9201-4 
2731 
93 
032 
1955 
7 
9201-5 
3233 
—. 
88 
0.33 
— 
Hand Written#Taken 
1955 
8 
9201-4 
4156 
.85 
0.22 
Hand Written #Taken 
1955 
8 
9201-5 
4098 
87 
0.33 
Hand Written #Taken 
1955 
9 
9201-4 
7534 
88 
0.24 
Hand Written # Taken 
1955 
9 
9201-5 
6064 
87 
0.2 
Hand Written # Taken 
1955 
10 
9201-4 
5686 
83 
024 
Hand Written #Taken 
1955 
1955 
Hand Written # Taken 
5734 
Hand Written#Taken 
Hand Written #Taken 
1955 
11 
9201-5 
7429 
77 
1955 
12 
9201-4 
7073 
81 
028 
Hand Wiitten#Taken 
1955 
12 
9201-5 
8379 
77 
02 
HandWritten#Taken 
1956 
1 
9201-4 
7224 
72.5 
0.2 
Hand Written # Taken 
1956 
1 
9201-5 
9556 
69 
. 
0.15 
1956 
2 
9201-4 
8492 
41 
0.11 
Hand Written#Taken 
1956 
2 
9201-5 
13605 
49.7 
0.11 
Hand Written #Taken 
1956 
3 
9201-4 
10373 
9.7 
0.06 
1956 
3 
9201-5 
15026 
22.5 
- 
0.09 
Hand Written # Taken 
1956 
4 
9201-4 
10116 
4 
0.05 
Hand Written #Taken 
1956 
4 
9201-5 
17027 
28 
0.1 
Hand Written #Taken 
1956 
5 
9201-5 
11199 
5 
0.05 
Hand Written #Taken 
1956 
5 
9201-5 
15219 
26 
0.1 
HandWrttten # Taken 
1956 
6 
9201-4 
10943 
4.6 
0.05 
Hand Written # Taken 
1956 
6 
9201-5 
14182 
27 
0.1 
Hand Written#Taken 
1956 
1956 
1956 
8 
. 
9201-4 
11416 
3 
0.05 
Hand Written #Taken 
1956 
8 
9201-5 
12843 
30 
0.1 
Hand Written # Taken 
1956 
9 
9201-4 
7417 
1.6 
0.04 
Hand Written# Taken 
1956 
9 
9201-5 
15299 
21 
0.07 
Hand Written #Taken 
1956 
10 
9201-4 
7569 
5.2 
0.04 
. 
1956 
10 
9201-5 
15868 
. 
— 16.7 
0.07 
— 
1956 
11 
9201-4 . 
8962 
3.2 
0.04 
11956 
ii 
9201-5 
15017 
12 
0.05 
Y-12 Report Summary Resuits 
Mercury Monthly, Air 
9201-4 
9278 
2.7 
0.04 
9201-5 
9201-4 
12582 
9457 
11 
131 
003 
1 
9201-4 
11104 
7.9 
0.04 
7 
6 
6 
11 
— 
11 
92014 
9201-5 
4679 
Year 
Month 
Location 
Number of Samples % > MPL Air Concentration mg/M3 
Comments 
- 
— 
-- 
1956 
12 
9201 4 
8132 
3 8 
8.3 
0 04 
0.05 
1956 
12 
9201-5 
13131 
1957 
1957 
1 
9201-5 
15726 
3.7 
0.04 
1957 
2 
9201-4 
9450 
4.6 
0.04 
1957 
2 
9201-5 
13601 
3.4 
0.04 
, 
1957 
3 
9201-4 
9619 
2 
0.03 
1957 
3 
9201-5 
14103 
2.8 
0.04 
1957 
4 
9201-4 
9690 
2.1 
0.03 
1957 
4 
9201-5 
13973 
1.3 
0.04 
1957 
5 
9201-4 
10132 
0.9 
0.03 
--_________________ 
1957 
5 
9201-5 
14237 
1.6 
0.04 
1957 
1957 
1957 
1957 
1957 
7331 
233 
147 
002 
003 
1957 
11 
8110 
680 
9.4 
1957 
12 
9201-4 
4416 
0.88 
0.02 
1957 
— 
12 
9201-5 
6430 
1 56 
002 
1957 
12 
8110 
610 
- 
9.83 
. 
- 
- - - 
1958 
1 
9201-4 
5544 
2.13 
0.02 
- 
- 
. 
1958 
1 
9201-5 
7899 
1.88 
0.02 
- 
. 
- 
0.03 
1957 
7 
9201-5 
13277 
0.2 
0.04 
1957 
7 
8110 
515 
23.1 
1957 
8 
9201-4 
7470 
1.05 
0.02 
1957 
8 
9201-5 
11017 
0.31 
0.03 
1957 
8 
8110 
801 
23.6 
1957 
9 
- 
9201-4 
5509 
2.08 
0.03 
1957 
9 
9201-5 
7938 
0.53 
003 
— 
1957 
9 
8110 
610 
31.2 
1957 
10 
9201-4 — 
5782 
1.17 
0.02 
1957 
10 
9201-5 
8616 
0.56 
0.02 
1957 
10 
8110 
524 
16.6 
. 
- 
095 
1147 
003 
Mercury Monthly, Air 
Y-12 Report Summary Results 
7271 
103 
0.04 
651 
23.81 
9201-4 
9201-5 
5416 
9201-4 
2828 
3.5 
0.03 
- 
9201 5 
8110 
3861 
06 
002 
589 
28.52 
1 
8110 
9808 
634 
264 
8.05 
2.65 
0.02 — 
2 
2 
5 
5 
5 
Year 
Month 
Location 
Number of Samples %> MPL Air Concentration mg/M3 
Comments 
1958 
1958 - 
1 
1958 
1958 
1 18 
002 
002 
1958 
2 
8110 
584 
7.29 
1958 
2 
9808 
240 
3.75 
0.03 
1958 
3 
9201-4 
5581 
1.22 
0.02 
1958 
3 
9201-5 
7823 
0.97 
0.02 
- 
. 
1958 
3 
8110 
551 
19.2 
. 
1958 
3 
9808 
252 
— 
7.1 
0.04 
- 
1958 
4 
9201-4 
3877 
0.95 
0.02 
1958 
1958 
4 
4 
9201-5 
8110 
5371 
619 
216 
1958 
4 
9808 
6.48 
- 0.04 
1958 
1958 
1958 
1958 
5 
9808 
252 
9.13 
0.05 
1958 
6 
9201-4 
2893 
4.77 
0.04 
. 
1958 
6 
9201-5 
3872 
- 
1.4 
002 
1958 
6 
8110 
589 
28.52 
. 
- 
1958 
6 
9808 
259 
10.81 
0.04 
1958 
7 
9201-4 
4135 
11.78 
0.05 
1958 
7 
9201-5 
4008 
1.17 
0.02 
1958 
7 
8110 
785 
50.45 
1958 
7 
9808 
164 
3.66 
0.03 
1958 
8 
9201-4 
2916 
0.99 
0.03 
1958 
8 — 
9201-5 
4002 
1.2 
0.02 
1958 
1958 
8 
8110 
681 
45.38 
- 
8 
9808 
161 
0 
0.02 
1958 
9 
9201-4 
3028 
1.02 
0.03 
. 
1958 
1958 
9 
9 
9201-5 
8110 
3842 
1.07 
0.02 
1958 
9 
9808 
204 
0.98 
Mercury Monthly, Air 
Y-12 Report Summary Results 
3473 
233 
003 
572 
34.44 
, 
9201-5 
8110 
9808 
228 
658 
003 
9201-4 
2730 
3.44 
0.02 
2 
3 
11 
Year 
Month 
Location 
Number of Samples %> MPL Air Concentration mgIM3 
Comments 
- 
1958 
10 
9201-4 
3189 
0.17 
0.02 
- 
- 
1958 
1958 
10 
10 
9201-5 
4236 . 
1.77 
0.02 
8110 
713 
2061 
1958 
10 
9808 
253 
4.35 
0.04 
1958 
11 
9201-4 
2659 
12 
003 
1958 
1958 
11 
1958 
11 
9808 
228 
395 
004 
1958 
— 12 
9201-4 
3012 
0.76 
0.02 
. 
1958 
12 
9201-5 
4014 
4.16 
0.03 
1958 
12 
8110 
681 
12.63 
1958 
12 
9808 
263 
7.74 
0.04 
1959 
1 
9201-4 
2989 
237 
003 
1959 
1 
9201-5 
3853 
11.14 
0.04 
1959 
1 
8110 
341 
4.69 
1959 
1 
9808 
252 
8.73 
004 
1959 
2 
9201-4 
2717 
2.76 
0.03 
1959 
2 
9201.5 
3490 
7.13 
0.03 
1959 
2 
8110 
no samples 
1959 
1959 
0.04 
ading involing shut dow 
n 3/13/59 
1959 
3 
9201-5 
3827 
16.54 
1959 
3 - 9808 
252 
1.98 
0.03 
1959 
4 
9201-4 
2958 
3.45 
0.03 
1959 
4 
9201-5 
2208 
24.28 
0.05 
1959 
3 
8110 
310 
12.26 
1959 
4 
8110 
682 
20.97 
1959 
4 
9808 
204 
2.94 
0.03 
1959 
5 
9201-4 
2539 
5.04 
0.03 
1959 
5 
9201-5 
1653 
20.2 
0.07- 
1959 
5 
8110 
620 
240 
25.97 
5.42 
0.03 
. 
- - - 
1959 
5 
9808 
1959 
6 
9201-4 
2512 
3.58 
0.03 
- 
- 
1959 
6 
9201-5 
745 
14.02 
0.04 
. 
- 
. 
- 
0.04 
0.04 
- 
0.03 
2.72 - 
11.11 
Y-12 Report Summary Results 
Mercury Monthly, Air 
9 
9808 
9201-4 
108 
2278 
8 
2 
8110 
9808 
585 
207 
6.33 
1.93 
- 
0.02 
2 
Year 
Month 
Location 
Number of Samples 
% > MPL Air Concentration mg/M3 j 
Comments 
1959 
6 
8110 
669 
22.42 
1959 
6 
9808 
120 
0.83 
0.03 
1959 
1959 
7 
9201-4 
2504 
3.72 
0,03 
7 
9201-5 
695 
3.47 
0.04 
1959 
7 
8110 
682 
19.35 
1959 
7 
9808 
108 
1.84 
0.02 
'• 
- 
1959 
9 
9201-5 
770 
I.16 
1959 
9 
8110 
641 
19.82 
1959 
9 
9808 
120 
083 
002 
1959 
10 
9201-4 
2258 
1.33 
0.02 
1959 
11 
9201-4 
2173 
2.35 
0.02 
- 
- 
1959 
11 
9201-5 
644 
4 19 
0 04 
1959 
11 
8110 
551 
908 
— 
1959 
11 
9808 
180 
1.11 
0.03 
. 
1959 
10 
9201-5 
639 
3.81 
0.03 
. 
1959 
10 
8110 
609 
16.42 
1959 
10 
9808 
180 
3.91 
0.03 
1959 
12 
9201-4 
2537 
3.78 
0.02 
- 
1959 
12 
9201-5 
693 
23.09 
0.03 
1959 
12 
8110 
578 
9.34 
1959 
12 
9808 
180 
1.11 
0.03 
1960 
1 
9201-4 
1955 
— 
1.69 
0.02 
1960 
1 
9201-5 
797 
7.4 
0.04 
. 
1960 
1 
8110 
580 
7.76 
. 
1960 
1 
9808 
192 
—- 
0.52 
0.02 
1960 
2 
9201-4 
2122 
2.88 
0.02 
- 
1960 
2 
9201-5 
681 
0.29 
G.02 
1960 
1960 
1959 
8 
9201-4 
2320 
543 
004 
— 
1959 
8 
9201-5 
691 
7.67 
0.05 
- 
. - 
1959 
8 
8110 
651 
21.65 
. 
1959 
1959 
. 
0.03 
003 
Y-12 Report Summary Results 
Mercury Monthly, Air 
2434 
5 
9808 
9201-4 
247 
0.81 
427 
Year 
Month 
Location 
Number of Samples %> MPL Air Concentration mgIM3 
• 
Comments 
1960 
3 
9201-4 
2695 
2.67 
0.02 
1960 
3 
9201-5 
748 
0 
0,02 
- 
1960 
3 
8110 
638 
15.36 
1960 
3 
9808 
273 
1.83 
0.02 
1960 
4 
9201-4 
2305 
3.9 
- 
0.02 
1960 
4 
9201-5 
620 
3.22 
0.04 
.. 
1960 
4 
8110 
568 
14.79 
1960 
1960 
4 
1960 
6 
9201-4 
2604 
645 
003 
1960 
6 
9201-5 
683 
11.42 
0.05 
1960 
6 
8110 
418 
1866 
003 
1960 
6 
9808 
308 
26 
1960 
7 
9201-4 
2126 
6.96 
0.04 
1960 
7 
9201-5 
641 
11.54 
- 
0.05 
1960 
7 
8110 
322 
9.01 
. 
1960 
7 
9808 
252 
5.16 
0.04 
1960 
8 
9201-4 
2766 
4.27 
0.03 
- 
1960 
8 
9201-5 
,41 
1322 
005 
1960 
8 
8110 
390 
12.56 
. 
1960 
8 
9808 
289 
2.08 
0.03 
1960 
9 
9201-4 
2279 
2.98 
0.03 
1960 
9 
9201-5 
729 
7.96 
0.04 
1960 
9 
8110 
354 
6.78 
- 
1960 
9 
9808 
294 
1.7 
0.03 
1960 
10 
9201-4 
2432 
2.59 
0.02 
1960 
10 
9201-5 
782 
4.73 
0.03 
1960 
10 
8110 
339 
6.19 
1960 
10 
9808 
266 
3.38 
0.03 
1960 
11 
9201-4 
2455 
2.73 
0.02 
- 
1960 
11 
9201-5 
830 
5.78 
0.03 
1960 
5 
9201-5 
748 
3.07 
0.03 
' 
1960 
5 
8110 
357 
13.72 
1960 
5 
9808 
278 
072 
003 
— 
- 
Y-12 Report Summary Results 
Mercury Monthly, Air 
15 
0 
— 
0.01 
— 
1910 
20 
0.02 
8 
9808 
9201-4 
8 
Year 
Month 
Location 
Nt.mb er of Samp'es 
% > MPL Air Concentration mg/M3 
Comments 
. 
1960 
11 
8110 
357 
616 
1960 
11 
9808 
266 
2.26 
0.03 
1960 
12 
92014 
2379 
395 
003 
1960 
12 
9201 5 
733 
341 
003 
1960 
12 
8110 
346 
1.16 
1960 
12 . 
9808 
182 
1.1 
0.02 
1961 
1 
9201-4 
2415 
3.77 
0,03 
1961 
1 
8110 
349 
0.86 
1961 
1 
9808 
238 
1.68 
0.02 
1961 
2 
9201-4 
1880 
2.02 
0.02 
1961 
2 
8110 
249 
5.22 
1961 
2 
9808 
205 
0.9 
0.02 
1961 
3 
9201-4 
2557 
0.86 
0.02 
1961 
3 
8110 
334 
9.58 
1961 
4 
8110 
340 
8.24 
1961 
3 
9808 
315 
127 
002 
1961 
4 
9201-4 
2286 
0.83 
0.02 
1961 
4 
9808 
300 
067 
001 
1961 
5 
9201-4 
2453 
0.08 
0.01 
1961 
5 
8110 
85 
3.53 
1961 
5 
9808 
180 
0 
001 
1961 
6 
9201-4 
2321 
0.99 
0.02 
1961 
6 
8110 
68 
0 
1961 
7 
8110 
— 
17 
— 
0 
1961 
1961 
7 
1961 
1961 
1961 
8 
8110 
34 
1 
9808 
45 
0 
0.01 - 
9 
9201-4 
1554 
16 
0.02 
1961 
9 
8110 
17 
0 
. 
- 
1961 
— 
9 
9808 
30 
— 
C 
0.01 
- 
1961 
- 
10 
9201-4 
. 
- 
- 
1961 
6 
9808 
120 
0 
0.01 
- 
1961 
7 
9201-4 
955 
4 
0.02 
9-) 
Y-1 2 Report Summary Results 
Mercury Monthly, Air 
Year 
Month 
Location 
Number of Samples % > MPL Air Concentration mg/M3 
Comments 
1961 
10 
8110 
—— 
1961 
10 
9808 
. 
1961 
11 
9201-4 
1961 
11 
8110 
1961 
11 
9808 
1961 
12 
9201-4 
1961 
12 
8110 
1961 
12 
9808 
- 
- 
0 
9) 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
All Alpha, Air 
- 
7dImIM3 
7d/m/M3 
Outdoor 
Outdoor 
Y-12 
Y-12 
80 
80 
65 
1 
2 
3 
— 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable Type of Sampi 
Location 
Number of 
% > MPL Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
- 
- 
1953 
3 
7d/mIM3 
Outdoor 
Y-12 
171 
0 
1953 
4 
7dImIM3 
Outdoor 
Y-12 
171 
0 
1954 
1 
Outdoor 
129 
0 
1954 
2 
7d/mIM3 
Outdoor 
Y-12 
270 
0 
1954 
4 
7d/mIM3 
Outdoor 
Y12 
84 
0 
1955 
1955 
1955 
0 
0 
0 
7d/m/M3 
Outdoor 
Y-12 
1955 
4 
7d/m/M3 
Outdoor 
Y-12 
215 
11 
0 
) 
4: 
9212 
9212 
9212 
Y-121H/HP Report SUmmary Results 
Enriched Uranium, Air 
70d/m/M3 
70d/m/M3 
General Air 
Operational 
General Air 
1953 
2 
70d/m/M3 
-— 
General Air 
9999212 
3476 
2 
1953 
3 
70d/m/M3 
General Air 
9212 
3520 
30 
- 
1953 
3 
70d/m/M3 
Operational 
9212 
264 
37 
1953 
4 
1953 
4 
1954 
1 
4117 
13 
223 
2250 
52 
12 
1954 
1 
Operational 
9212 
276 
35 
1954 
2 
.5uglM3 
- 
General Air 
9212 
2652 
20 
1954 
2 
.5ug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
245 
38 
- 
- 
9206 
j 
69 
50 
________ 
1954 
4 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
9206 
348 - 
34 
- 
- 
1955 
1 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
3572 
- 
5 
1955 
1 
.5ug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
266 
291 
- 
1955 
1 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
9206 
388 
26 
1955 
1 
5ug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
58 
43 
1955 
1 
1955 
2 
5ug/M3 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
General Air 
995 
9212 
151 
3300 
0 - 
2 
1955 
2 
5ug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
285 
35 
1955 
2 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
9206 
1675 
18 
30 
1955 
2 
.5ug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
75 
1955 
2 
.Sug/M3 
General Air 
9995 
0 
- 
0 
1955 
3 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
7300 
5 
1955 
3 
.Sug/M3 — 
Operational 
9212 
- 
75 
60 
1955 
3 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
9206 
2800 
4 
Year 
Quarter Max Allowable Type of Sampl 
Location 
Number of 
%> MPL Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
1952 
1 
60 
1952 
2 
42 
1952 
3 
- 
1952 
4 
11953 
1 
7OdIm/M3 
Operational 
9212 
253 
55 
1953 
1 
70d/m/M3 
General Air 
9212 
— 
1800 
3 
1953 
2 
7OdIm/M3 
Operational 
9212 
377- 
40 
- 
- 
- 1954 
4 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
3270 
5 
1954 
4 
.5ug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
302 
- 
- 
34 
1954 
4 
.5ug/M3 
Operational 
U' 
9 
75 
4300 
255 
9995 
9212 
9212 
Y-121H/HP Report Summary Results 
Enriched Uranium, Air 
General Air 
General Air 
Operational 
.5ug/M3 
.5ug/M3 
.5ug/M3 
3 
4 
4 
Year 
Quarter Max Allowable Type of Sampi 
Location 
Number of 
- %> MPL Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
1955 
3 
.5ug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
150 
30 
1955 
1955 
1955 
0 
6 
47 
1955 
4 
.5ugIM3 
General Air 
9206 
1450 
7 
1955 
4 
.5ugIM3 
Operational 
9206 
220 
34 
1955 
4 
.5ug/M3 
General Air 
9995 
130 
0 
1955 
4 
.5ug/M3 
Operational 
9995 
15 
0 
. 
- 
- 
46 
--______ 
30 
31 
139 
6 
50 
10 
Y-.12 lH/HP Report Summary Results 
Uranium, Air 
Operational 
Operational 
Operational 
Operational 
Operational 
General Air 
9212 
9206 
— 
9206 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
Year 
Quarter 
Max Allowable Type of Sampl — 
Location 
Number of 
% > MPL 
Comment 
- 
- 
- 
Concentrations 
Samples 
1952 
1O'52 
1952 
1952 
41 
1953 
1953 
1953 
1953 
5OugIM3 
Operational 
9206 
136 
21 
5OugIM3 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
General Air 
9212 
9212 
251 
1956 
19 
2 
2 
5OugIM3 
Operational 
9212 
164 
33 
1953 
1953 
2 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
2438 
1 
2 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
100 
38 
1953 
2 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
Rest of Y-12 
52 
23 
1953 
3 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
2470 
1 
1953 
3 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
89 
37 
1953 
3 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
5 
33 
1953 
4 
50u9/M3 
General Air 
9212 
2916 
3 
1953 
4 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
85 
56 
1953 
4 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
18 
33 
1953 
4 
Duct 
9211 
10 
0 
1954 
1954 
1 
5Oug/M3 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
Operational 
9212 
9212 
2238 
204 
7 
15 
1954 
1 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
9206 
75 
7 
1954 
2 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
— 
134 
11 
— 
1954 
2 
Duct 
9212 
50 
954 
3 
. 
No Data 
1954 
4 
SOug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
1930 
10 
1954 
1954 
4 
4 
5Oug/M3 
5Oug/M3 
5Oug/M3 
1954 
4 
Operational 
- 
69 
50 
- 
- 
— 
1954 
1 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
40 
50 
- 
-- 
1 
Duct 
9211 
1954 
2 
- 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
—_________ 
1398 
3 
1954 
2 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
—_____ 
75 
25 
- 
1954 
2 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
9206 
366 
- 
0 
- 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Uranium, Air 
1 
2 
l5mg/M3 
26 
— 
192 
Fume 
—— 
- 
3 
4 
l5mg/M3 
- 
2 
0 
0 
0 
Based on Chemical Toxicity 
Based 
Chemical 
— 
Year 
Quarter Max Allowable Type of Sampl 
Location 
Number of 
% > MPL 
Comment 
Concentrations 
Samples 
— 
1954 
4 
Duct 
9212 
3 
1954 
4 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
9995 
176 
0 
. 
1954 
4 
5OugIM3 
Operational 
9201-2 
15 
75 
1955 
— 
1 
5OugIM3 
General Air 
9212 
1808 
16 
1955 
1 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
159 
20 
1955 
1 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
127 
48 
1955 
1955 
1 
Duct 
9206 
0 
- 
Duct 
9212 
2 
1955 
2 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
2160 
7 
- 
1955 
2 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
370 
90 
40 
1955 
1955 
2 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
40 
3 
5Oug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
1900 
17 
1955 
3 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
160 
86 
1955 
3 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
0 
1955 
3 
5Oug/M3 
Operational 
9211 
30 
90 
1955 
4 
SOug/M3 
General Air 
9212 
1940 
5 
1955 
4 
SOug/M3 
Operational 
9212 
175 
82 
1955 
4 
SOug/M3 
Operational 
9206 
55 
35 
1955 
4 
5OugIM3 
Operational 
9211 
— 
30 
80 
1956 
1956 
1 
.l5mgIM3 
3 
0 
Based on Chemical Tpxicity (dust) 
2 
l5mg/M3 
0 
1957 
1 - 
l5mg/M3 
3 
0 
Fume 
1957 
1957 
1957 
D-2
Y-12 H&S Report Urine Data Summary
Y-12 H/HP Report Summary Resufts
Cadmium, Urine
Year
Quarter
Total Number %> MPL
MAC
.
,
of Analyses
1958
4
54
0.
.l5ug/ml
1960
.4
0
0
.lOmg/L
1962
1
0
0,
.lOmg/L
•
1962
2
2
0
.lOmg/L
1962
3
0
0
.lOmg/L
____
Da-
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results
Fluorides, Urine
Year
Quarter Total Number
%> MPL
Max. Allowable Concentrations
of Analyses
1958
2
17
5.9
4ppm
1958
3
33
0
.1 Smg/L
1958
4
46
0
4ppm
1959
1
80
0
4ppm
1959
2
97
0
4ppm
1959
2
97
8.6
2 ppm
1959
3
84
8.3
4ppm
1959
3
84
36.9
2ppm
1959
4
81
4.9
4ppm
1 959
4
81
39.5
2 ppm
1 960
1
81
2.5
4ppm
1 960
1
81
56.8
2ppm
1960
2
43
0
4ppm
1960
2
43
53.5
2ppm
1960
3
0
0
4ppm
1960
3
0
0
2ppm
1960
4
66
1.5
4 ppm
1960
4
—
66
12.1
2 ppm
1961
1
55
0
4ppm
1961
1
55
10
2ppm
1961
2
0
0
4ppm
1961
3
0
0
4ppm
1961
4
0
0
4ppm
Y-12 lH/HP Report Summary Results 
Lead, Urine 
0 
0 
0 
0 
17 
102 
64 
112 
2 
210 
0 
.l5myIL 
3 
7 
0 
.l5mg/L 
4 
76 
0.13 
.1 5mg/L 
This includes 39 
from 0 R 
1 
23 
8.7 
.l5mg/L 
samples 
Processing Personnel 
2 
3 
30 
20 
0 
0 
.l5mg/L 
.l5mg/L 
34 from OR Processing Co: 
37 from ORPC, 36 
from Lab 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
27 
0 
l5mg/L 
Year 
Quarter 
Total_Number 
%> MPL 
MAC 
Comments 
of Analyses 
1958 
1958 
1958 
1959 
1959 
1959 
l5mg/L 
Backlog 
37 ORPC 
45 ORPC 
37 ORPC 
l5mg/L 
1 5mg/L 
l5mg/L 
1960 
1959 
1960 
1960 
1960 
1961 
1961 
1 
2 
15 
0 
l5mg/L 
12 
0 
l5mg/L 
1961 
3 
14 
1 
.l5mg/L 
1961 
4 
10 
2 
.15m9/L 
- 
1962 
1 
15 
0 
.l5mg/L 
1962 
2 
15 
0 
.l5mg/L 
- 
. 
. 
1962 
4 
45 
0 
.l5mg/L f 
TLV 
1963 
1 
41 
0 
.l5mg/L 
1962 
3 
7 
0 
.l5mg/L 
. 
Y-12 lH/HP Report Summary Results 
Mercury, Urine 
1 
2 
905 
748 
6.6 
6 4 
1104 
936 
6.1 
5 4 
.3mg/L 
— 
3 
4 
593 
588 
8.4 
5.8 
953 
888 
Year 
Quarter 
Total Number 
— 
%> MPL 
Total Number 
%> MPL 
MAC 
Comments 
of Analyses(People) 
of Analyses(Samples) 
3 
888 
182 
1301 
15 
3mg/L 
1956 
4 
889 
12 
1213 
9.6 
.3mg/L 
1957 
1957 
1957 
3mg/L 
3 
730 
58 
1017 
76 
3mgIL 
1957 
4 
730 
— 
3.2 
880 
4.2 
.3mgIL 
1958 
1 
689 
3.9 
799 
- — 
3.9 
.3mg/L 
1958 
2 
658 
6.8 
— 
928 
— 
8.8 
.3mg/L 
1958 
1958 
- - 
11.1 
5.9 
.3mg/L 
.3mg/L 
-. 
-- 
1959 
1 
565 
5.7 
793 
5.2 
.3mg/L - 
1959 
2 
454 
7.5 
677 
1 
7.1 
.3mg/L 
38 from Ferguson Const. Co. 
1959 
3 
345 
5,8 
481 
5 
.3mg/L 
1959 
4 
324 
3.1 
450 
4.9 
.3mg/L 
1960 
- 
1 
289 
— 
2 8 
426 
2 1 
3mg/L 
9 Ferguson Const Co 
1960 
2 
262 
2.3 
398 
2 
.3mg/L 
1960 
1960 
3 
4 
277 
225 
2.2 
0.9 
408 
228 
1.7 
0.9 
.3mgiL 
.3mg/L 
1961 
1 
181 
— 
4 
194 
7 
3mg/L 
1961 
2 
207 
3 
257 
3 
mg/L 
1961 
3 
200 
— 
1 
212 
1 
.3mg/L 
1961 
4 
186 
2 
191 
2 
.3mg/L 
1962 
1 
179 
0 
180 
0 
.3mg/L 
- 
- 1952 
4 
5 3 
3mgIL 
1953 
1 
—- 
6 
- .3mgIL 
1953 
1953 
2 
3 
0 
3mg/L 
0 
3mg/L 
1953 
4 
94 
3mgIL 
— 1955 
2 
776 
21.6 
988 
24 
.3mgIL 
1955 
3 
756 
32 
868 
34 
- 
.3mgIL 
. 
- 
1955 
4 
793 
28 
921 
26 
.3mg/L 
1956 
1 
931 
27.5 
1875 
29.5 
.3mg/L 
- 
1956 
1956 
2 
1090 
29 
1948 
26.5 
.3mg/L 
- 
9) £ 
.3mgIL 
.3mg/L 
.3mg/L 
11111 
148 
Y-12 IH/HP Report Summary Results 
Mercury, Urine 
146 
1 
147 
- 
141 j 
2 
143 
146 
2 
Resamples taken were within 
TLV 
1 
2 
2 
9 
101 
1962 
2 
1962 
3 
1962 
4 
191i3 
1 
0.55 
50 Micrograms/24_hours 
2 
3.5 
50 Micrograms/24 hours 
50 Microgramsl24 hours 
50 Micrograms/24 hours 
8.8 
'(-12 lH/HP Report Summary Results 
Uranium, Urine 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Year 
Quarter 
Total Number 
% > MPL 
Positive Fi 
Max. Allowable Concentrations 
of Analyses 
VMR (special) 
1952 
4 
2.7 
50 Microgramsl24 hours 
1953 
1953 
1953 
1953 
Y-12 IH/HP report Summary Results
Enriched Uranuni, Urine
No ofPosWveRndings Max Allowable Cohcentratjo
953
__
_________________________ 6.1
________
7OdsIntegrat,ons/,fl/4 hour
1954
32.5
70 disintegrations/jfl/4 hour
D-3
X1O HealthPhysics Report Urine Data Summary
X-1O H S Reports Summary Results
Plutonium-241, Urine
Year
Total Number
of Analyses
I
1978
26
L
1979
241
D3-I
X-1O H S Reports Summary Results
Gross Beta, Urine
Highest Specimen Analyzed
d/m/24Hr. Spec
8tOOO
_____
2.6
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
of Analyses
______
134
3
1958
1968
, ,
t3c2-
X-1 0 H S Reports Summary Results
PLutonium-239, Urine
Year
Total Number Weekly Average Highest Specimen Analyzed Comments
of Analyses
d/m/24Hr. Spec
1961
35
1.3
1962
14
1963
21
1964
2011
1965
1
146
1q66
1429
1967
1468
.
1968
1373
1969
1629
1970
979
,
Pu Alpha
1971
955
Pu Alpha
1972
764
Pu Alpha
1973
800
Pu Alpha
1974
589
.
Pu Alpha
1975
502
Pu Alpha
1976
580
Pu Alpha
1977
423
Pu Alpha
1978
449
PuAha
1979
390
Pu Alpha
1980
330
Pu Alpha
1982
440
Pu Alpha
t3-3
X-1O H S Reports Summary Results
Polonium, Urine
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed Commen
of Analyses
d/m/24Hr. Spec
1958
21
41
1960
2
1.1
Po-210
1961
11
3.4
, ,
c,3-L
X-10 H S Reports Summary Results
Gross Alpha, Feces
.
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed•
of Analyses
dlm/24Hr Spec
1958
890
17.1
990
959
361
6.94
1.2x103
11960
74
None
1961
378
None
1962
68
1963
91
1964
100
1965
73
.
1966
3
1967
3
1968
2
X-1O H S Reports Summary Results
Lead, Urine
Year
Total Number
of Analyses
Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed
mg/liter of urine
1958
150
2.9
0.29
I
D3-4
X-1O H S Reports Summary Results
Radium,Urin
:
0.4
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed
of Analyses
dImI24Hr. Spec
1958
189
3.6.
11
1959
140.
2.69
0.83
1960
7
,
6.2x103
1961 :
D3
X-10 H S Report Sunhrni Results
Phospho,rus-32, Urine
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed
of Analyses
dlm/24Hr. Spec
1959
12
0.23
6.5x105
.1960
20
.
.
1.5x103
1961
10
5.8x103
1962
4
.
1963
4
.
.
1964
.15
1965
None
1966
NOne
.
1967
None
1969
40
..
.
X-10 H S Rèpdrt Summary Results
Cesium, Urine
.
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed Comment
of Analyses
dImI24Hr. Spec
1959
57
1.1
4.4x103
1960
9
.
4.9x10 3
Cs-137
1961
39
790
Cs-I 37
1962
43
1963
42
1964
98
•I
.
.
1965
146
Cs-137
1966
182
Cs-137
1967
175
Cs-137
1968
198
.
Cs-137
1969
301
Cs-137
1970
198
.
1971
150
1972
25
1973
102
.
1974
55
.
.
1975
16
,
1976
34
1977
3
.
03-q
X-1O H S Report Summary Results
Protactinium-23 Urine
Year
Total Number Weelly Average
Higheat Specimen Analyzed Comments
of Analyses
,
d/mI24Hr., Spec
1960
2.
•2
1961,
14
,
.
'
12
D- 10
X-1O H S Reports Summary Results
Gross Alpha, Urine
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed
l
•
of Analyses
.
dlm/24Hr. Spec
1958
966
18.2
3.6
1959
821
15.79
2.48
.
1960
1926
.
2
1961
1687
13
.
1962,
3059
1963
3483
1964
697
1968
22
,
D3-I
X-1O HS Reports Summary Results,
GrossAlph, ,rhie
X10 H S Report Summary Results
Tritum, Urine
.
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed
of Analyses
uc/liter of urine
1958
21
0.4
4
1959
34
0.65
150
.
1960
8
5.0x107
1962
62
'
1963
121
.
.
•
.
a
1964
187
.
.
,
1965
104
1966
524
1967
318
1968
134
1969
163
•
1970
258
1971
130
.
.
1972
58
•
.
.
1973
78
.
1974
136
.
1975
93
,
.
.
1976
160
1977
184
.
1978
229
1979
401
1980
169
.
1982
132
.
.
'3
X-1O H S Report Summary Results
Tritum, Urine
X-10 H S report Summary Results
Strontium, Urifle
,
.
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed
comthents
of Analyses
,
d/m/2IHr. Spec
1958
1452
.'
27.9
165,000d/m/24Hr. Spec
1959
.1056
.20.31
"
.
3.2x104
1960
3
21.
Sr-85
1960
357
.
3.3x105
,
Sr-89
1960
'625
'.
6.2x10'3 .
Sr-90
1961
4
.
120
.
Sr-89
1961
1318
1.4x104
Sr-90
1962
2800
,
Sr-9O
1962
4
.
Sr-89
1963
3007
. ..
.
.
.
.
.
.
1964
259
—
1965
2628
.
,
.
1966
1871
.
.
.
1967
1948
1968
1262
'
.
.
.
.
1969
1569
,
1970
806
1971
725
.
.
.
1972
389
'
,
1973
496
1974
308
.
.
.
,
1975
315
.
,
.
1976
218
1977
175
,
.
1978
163
1979
224
.
.
1980
245
.
1982 .
145
X-1O H S report Summary Results
•
Strontium, Urine
• •
o3-I
X-i0 H S Report Summary Results
Uranium, Urine
.
I
Year
Total Number
Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed
of Analyses
d/mI24hr. Spec
1958
1203
23.1
1400
1959
789
15.17
93
•
.
,
1960
501,
13
1961
612
160
1962
509
.
1963
932
.
1964
1095
•
1965
1929
.
1966
998.
.
1967
826
.
.
.
1968
594
,
1969
609
,
.
.
1970
338
.
1971
337
.
1972
306
.
1973
330
1974
.
214
1975
236
1976
257
1977
194
.
1978
249
.
1979
322
.
1980
269
1982
141
X-10 H S Report Summary Results
Curium-244, Urine
a1
Year Total Number
of Analyses
1965
502
1966
467
1967
427.
1968
469
1969
606
1970
587
1971
501
1972
556
1973
680
1974
466
1975
397
1976
541
1977
364
1978
433
1979
302
1980
295
1982
357
X-1O H S Report Summary Results
Neptu.niuni, Yrne
Year
Total Number
of Analyses
20
1969
.
7
X-1 0 H S Report Summary Results
•
• Cobalt-60, Urine
•
Yer
otal Number
of Analyses
• 1969.1
521
X-10 H S Report Summary Results
Ruthenium-I 06, Urine
Year
Total Number Weekly Average
Highest Specimen Analyzed
of Analyses
dlm/24 Hrs Spec.
1960
3
23
1962
5
.
1963
8
1964
4
1965
1628
.
.
1966
15
1967
44
1969
26
S
. ,
D-4
X-1O Ha1th Physics Report Occurrence Data Summary
Physics 
1 
2 
3 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 
14 
Reactor 
7 
2 
3 
I 
13 
- 
) 
X-10 Site Frequency of Occurences by Division 
Reactor Chemistry 
1 ii 
3 
Solid State 
I 
I 
I 
1 
4 
Thermonuclear 
I 
- I 
Totals: 
75 
55 
34 
29 
41 
22 
16 
20 
12 
9 
10 
11 
10 
10 
II 
• 
I 
Isotopes 
9 
18 
5 
12 
10 
8 
4 
6 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2 
88 
Metals & Ceramics 
5 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 
Neutron Physics 
3 
3 
2 
2 
1 
11 
Operations 
12 
6 
9* 
3 
8 
4 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
1 
3 
48 
Division 
1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 Total by Division 
Analytical Chemistry 
3 
5 
9 
3 
6 
1 
3 
4 
1 
1 
1 
- 37 
Biology 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
Chemical Technology 
19 
13 
11 
3 
8 
3 
4 
5 
4 
2 
1 
1 
4 
3 
3 
84 
Chemistry 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Plant & Equipment 
4 
3 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 
- 15 
Inspection Engineering 
1 
1 
1 - 
1 
4 
Electronuclear Research 
7 
1 
1 
9 
Environmental Sciences 
1 
1 
HP 
1* 
1 
2 
1 
4 
Instrumentation & Controls 
I 
X-10 Frequency of Occurences by Building
.
Bldg
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
.2000
2'
.1
1
,'
3001
2.
2
3005
4'
H
I
'
•
2
1
3010
•
1
1
.
3019'
II
16
' 9
17
5
3O2
3
2
2
H 2
, I
3026-C
2
1
.
3026-D
.
2
.,
3028
2
2
2
I
3029
2
1
1
3031
•
I
.
1
3032
.
,
2
•
.3033
1
.
2
3038
,
3
1
2
3042
3
5
.
3
.3
350.8
2
1
1
1
3517
6
3
8
3
5.
3550
1
2
2
4500N
2
2.
1
1
4501
3
5
4507
, 2
3
1
5500
•2.
I
3
7500.
5
.
7
7700
2'
1
9201-2
4.
8
.
1
9204-1
6
1
1
9204-3
4
1
2
9207
2
1
1
2
9213
2
2
1
Misc.
'10
6
4
urial On. #5
1
1
Appendix E
, .
E-i
X-1O Questionnaire Results Summary
X-1O Risk Mapping
Questionaire Results
No. of Respondents
Reporting Exposure
%
,
25
86.2
'
'
'
24
82.8
23,
79.3
21
'
72.4
20
'
69.0
Solvents
20
69.0
20
69.0
18
,
62.1
17
58.6
16
55.2
'16
55.2
'
16
55.2
,
16
55.2
'
16
55.2
Hardeners
16
55.2
15
51.7
15
51.7
15
51.7
(Transuránics),
14
48.3
14
48.3
13
44.8
13
44.8
Hydrofluoric Acid
12
41.4
12
41.4
12
41.4
12
41.4
metals)
11
37.9
(wood,coal,fibers,etc)
10
34.5
10
34.5
(TCE),
10
34.5
10
34.5
,
9
31.0
Solvents
8
27.6
8
27.6
8
27.6
salt")
8
27.6
7
24.1
Chloride
7
24.1
7
24.1
6
20.7
6
20.7
6
20.7
5
17.2
j-I
X-1O Risk Mapping
Questionaire Results
.
No. of Respondents
Reporting Exposure
Chemical
Repetitive Movement!
vibrations
5
17.2
Technicium (Tc-99)
5
17.2
U03 (orange cake material)
5
172
Acrylonitrile
4
13.8
Arsenic
4
13.8
Chlorine Trifluoride (C1F3 —
Treatment Gas)
4
13.8
Uranium (235,238)
4
13.8
Plutonium (239,241)
4
13.8
Bromine Trifluoride
3
10.3
Vinyl Chloride
2
6.9
Strontium-90
2
6.9
Cesium-137
2
6.9
Stoddard Solvent
1
3.4
Curium-244
I
3.4
Tritum
1
3.4
Iodine-131
I
3.4
E-2
Y-12 Questionnaire Results Summary
Y-12 RiskMapping
Questionaire Results
No. of Respondents
Reporting Exposure
%
Chemical
Beryllium
36
81.8
4sbestos
33
75.0
'Toise
33
75.0
Radiation
33
75.0
Jranium metal
33
75.0
Degreasing Solvents
32
72.7
Freon
31
70.5
Cutting Oils
30
68.2
MerCury
30
68.2
Lead
29
65.9
Acetone
28
63.6
Dusts
(wood,coal,fibers,etc).
28
.
:
63.6
Epoxy Resins /
Hardeners
25
56.8
Aluminum
24
54.5
PCBs
24
54.5.
Welding Fumes
21
47.7
Copper
20
45.5
Fluorine or
Hydrofluoric Acid
(HF)
20
45.5
Trichioroethane
19
43.2
Metals (other metals)
17
38.6
Nickel
17
38.6
Nitric Acid
17
38.6
Carbon Tetrachloride
16
36.4
Chlorine
14
31.8
Fission Products
14
31.8
Thorium-232
14
31.8
Chlorinated Solvents
13
29.5
Trichioroethylene
(TCE), "Trico"
13
29.5
Cadmium
12
27.3
Repetitive Movement'
vibrations
12
27.3
Resins
12
27.3
Benzene
11
25.0
Chromates
11
25.0
Methylene Chloride
11
25.0
UF4 ("Green salt")
9
20.5
Chromic Acid
8
18.2
MEK
8
18.2
Phosphates
8
18.2
Plutonium
(Transuranics)
8
18.2
Y-12 Risk Mapping
Questionaire Results
No. of Respondents
Reporting Exposure
%
7
15.9
7
15.9
6
13.6
.
5
.
.
11.4
5
11.4
4
.
9.1
4.
9.1
4'.
9.1
4
9.1
3
6.8
cake
.
'
3
6.8
Trifluoride
2
4.5
Trifluoride
Treatment Gas)
2
4.5
Solvent
'
2
4.5
(Tc-99)
2
.
'
4.5
2
4.5
0
0.0
E
Appendix F
External Dose Summary Results
X-IOCEDR
External Dose Summary Results
0-1 REM
1-2 REM
2-3 REM
3-4 REM
4-5 REM
5-6 REM 6-UP REMI Max WB
Total Monitored
1943
445
8
1.43
1526
1944
1051
392
95
•
21
3.875
4587
1945
946
34
13
6
2
1
'
3331
1946
812
46
11
I
1
1
5.315
3118
1947
672
29
10
9
2
1
5.5
3654
1948
1221
34
14
8
.
.
3.845
4278
1949
674
42
31
18
5
3
5.22
2842
1950
995
71
27
5
2
I
3
6.485
•
3922
1951
874
87
45
15
17
3
5.74
'
4800
1952
1332
110
49
25
28
22
21
11.875
4985
1953
1617
•
131
48
27
26
13
6
9
4487
1954
1699
91
31
30
15
18
13
11.82
,
502
1955
1881
149
85
—
40
23
6
9
9.43
1956
2320
161
79
33
19
8
10
8.355
5577
1957
3331
2115
81
38
29
14
26
66.635
,
5472
1958
3893
267
78
.
24
13
6
5
8.23
5755
1959
3931
246
lOd
37
26
4
6
9.03
5968
1960
3116
210
35
16
10
5
5:87
5892
1961
8773
58
1
2.63
18145
1962
13767
36
388.608*
.
23346
1963
12207
32
.
1.91
18794
1964
11287
15
.
18165
1965
5357
9
1
2.3
•
17672
1966
.
26375
1967
6418
11
1.57
27368
1968
5871
10
1
2.9
26173
1969
4402
5
2
26067
1970
3879
3
1.88
24330
1971
3879
4 --
,________
1.21
23124
1972
3520
5
1.15
23672
1973
3756
2
-
I
1.84
22110
1974
3965
1
1
1.25
23529
1975
3045
1
1
25192
I
•
26647
1976
3148
1
•
1977
2669
1
1.74
28322
1978
2544
1
1.03
29698
1979
2547
0
0.62
25811
1980
1696
.
0
0.88
26226
1981
1738
1
1
2.09
26363
1982
1472
0.82
24226
1983
1665
.
0.72
22633
1984
1700
—
0.8
22884
0.76
22421
1985
1553
be confirmed on other sources.
* Data point could not
F-I
X4OCDEREPI
External Dose Summary Results
YEAR
0-1 REM
1-2 REM
2-3 REM
3-4 REM
4.5 REM
5-6 REM 6-UP REM Max WB
•
1943
718
4
,
,'
1.43
1944
1248
284
62
17
,
3.88
1945
1280.
72
,,
14
" 4,
2
7
'
5.705
1946
1037
44
13
1
'
1,
•
•
4.705
1947
679
.23
7
9
1
,,
5.105
1948
1103'
'27
11
9
,
'
,
3.845
•
1949
670
32
23
16
5
3
5.22
1950
919
59
23
4
'
2
1
.
3
6.485
1951
822
72
42
15
'
15
,
3
,
5.74
1952
1245
95
40
22
•24
18
17
11.875
1953
1512
107
44
25
22
13
.3
8.535
1954
1540
79
28
25
' 10
'
15
13
10.635
1955
1692
133
77
'
36
'
21
5
8
.43
1956
2032
143
.
73
28
15
7
9
8.355
1957
2806
190
'228
' 66
36
•26
12
23
66.635
1958
3237
66
20
14
5
5
8.23
1959
3259
224
81
27
21
3
3
9.03
1960
2628
.
176
• 28
. 15
6
4
5.87
1961
3074
112
12
8
1
2
•
6.28
1962
3667
136
•
24
,
12
• 3.765
1963
3374
135
15
•
5
5
.
4.89
1964
3838
112
20
.
6
1
•
4.17
•
• 1965
2243
84
30
5
1
4.41
1966
2087
97
22
•
5
3
4.85
1967
1965
108
34
9
•
3
5.1
1968
.1816
73
21
7
3
•
•
4.46
1969
1486
61
10
2
3.79
1970
1415
46
,
4
2
.
3.5
1971
•
1315
'
40
9
5
.
1
4.95
1972
1111
•
50
8
2
5
4.88
1973
1187
50
8
3
1
•
4.63
1974
1347
21
5
1
3.58
1975
976
' 34
5
•
:
2.67
• 3.42
1976
863
37
•
5
1
1977
• 680
19
10
2
3.62
1978
•
•
759
17
6
•
•
•
•
2.99
1979
520
23
2
•
•
2.11
1980
374
16
4
1
3.14
1981
285
17
1
• 1.
3.83
1982
225
14
1
2.11
1983
•
223
16
1
2.44
1984
237
8
1.89
1985
190
6
1.4
) 
X-loHandSReports 
External Dose Summary Reports 
1967 
— 140 
54 
17 
3 
5.1 
11 
25 
1968 
103 
39 
9 
5 
4.71 
13 
12 
1969 
90 
25 
2 
3.79 
8.8 
33 
1970 
65 
8 
2 
1 
4.04 
10 
56 
1971 
61 
13 
5 
2 
4.95 
8 
31 
1972 
78 
13 
2 
7 
4.88 
10 
52 
1973 
• 
66 
17 
3 
1 
. 
4.63 
84 
19 
1974 
33 
7 
1 
• 
3.58 
12.6 
22 
1975 
58 
13 
• 
2.71 
11.3 
22 
1976 
61 
9 
3 
0 
0 
0 
3.49 
16 
15 
1977 
34 
14 
3 
0 
0 
0 
3.62 
5 
14 
- 
1978 
39 
6 
1 
0 
0 
- 
3.34 
4.3 
26 
- 
1979 
46 
9 
0 
0 
0 
2.8 
3.6 
12 
1980 
35. 
10 
1 
0 
0 
31.4 
9.3 
11 
1981 
38.3 
- 
1982 
28 
1 
0 
0 
0 
2.11 
6.5 
6.5 
1959 
• 
260 
95 
40 
25 
10 
- 
- 
1960 
204 
35 
15 
9 
5 
5500 
1961 
141 
17 
8 
2 
2 
2 
. 
Fingers&Thumb 1200 REM, 300 REM 
1962 
158 
44 
10 
7 
no data 
1963 
178 
22 
9 
5 
1 
5.1 
9rem 
18.2 rem 
1964 
148 
35 
9 
1 
20.7 
14.4 
1964 
10.2 
1965 
124 
38 
9 
4.4 
8.1 
51 
1966 
129 
34 
19 
3 
4.9 
16 
25 
YEAR 
0-1 REM 1-2 REM 2-3 REM 
3-4 REM 4-5 REM 5-6 REM 6-UP REM Max WB SKIN (REM) HAND (REM) COMMENTS - 
Y-12CEDR
External Doses Summary Results
YEAR
.1-.5 REM .5-1 REM
1-2 REM
>2 REM Total Monitored
1952
4
3 '
0
17
'1953
18
2
1
0 :
27
1954
4
0
'
0
0
22
1955
77
1
1
'
0
85
'
1214
1956
.
•
569
36
'
6
0
•
1957
633
29
1
Q
'
'
1710
1958
1118 :
:
5'
.. 0
2324
1959
•
1340
37
2
'
1
2838
,
1960
1459
19
2
0
3740
1961
1606
10
12
1
•
•
17,640
7
0
.
1962
1893
40
'
23
,________
21,622
1963
, 884
,•
7
•
7713
1964
1040
16
4
7909
1965
•
754
14 '
.0
.
.
14,531
'1966
1057
34
1
•
11,434
1967
665
21
2
.
"
2
10,465
1968
554
5
' I
4
•
14,376
•
1969
899
29
0
1
•
20,886
1970
1012 '.
..
12
2
.
I
22,883
1971
750
2
0
1
.
.
4,206
1972
450
'
5
. 0
0
7,704
1973
.
369
.
6
,0
'
. 0
'
'
7,323'
1974
'
853
13
0
0
14,438
8
0
4
0
0
0
,
1975
1976
206
254
-
5,547
6,04
1,977
165
' 7
0
0
5,928
1978
355
, 0
0
0.
'.
10,431
'
1979
•
177
0
0
0
3,495
1980
591'
'
27
'
12
.
10
'
181
426
24
, 1
.
' 0
, 1,388
1982
. 709
20
0
0
•
. 1,875
1983
770,
16
0
1
1,963
1984
•
529
,
8
.
1
0
1985
'
•
.
•'
