  
 
 
 
Youth Resource Connections 
U.S. Department of Labor, Division of Youth Services  
200 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20210 (202) 693-3036, 
http://www.doleta.gov/youth_services/ 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Volume 11, Number 11  
 
 
 
 
 
November 30, 2011  
 
 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
The Employment and Training Administration’s WIA Youth Program Hosts its first 
Live Chat.  The Employment and Training Administration’s Division of Youth Services 
hosted a Live Chat entitled “WIA YOUTH TALK” on Tuesday, November 29th.  The Live 
Chat was designed to provide a real time discussion forum for individuals interested in 
general WIA youth issues, share promising practices, and hear about what other WIA youth 
programs are doing around the country.  To view a transcript of the LIVE CHAT and 
participate in future chats, visit the Youth Connections Community of Practice at:  
https://youth.workforce3one.org/.   
 
The Employment and Training Administration Issues Advisory Notice on the 
Availability of Assistive Technology Resources for Persons with Disabilities.  The 
Employment and Training Administration released Training and Employment Notice (TEN) 
16-11, which informs the public workforce system about Assistive Technology (AT) 
resources for persons with disabilities.  The TEN provides a definition of AT, outlines the 
types of AT, and summarizes funding sources.  To view the TEN, visit: 
http://wdr.doleta.gov/directives/corr_doc.cfm?docn=3096. 
 
The Employment and Training Administration Publishes Guidance on Selective 
Service Requirements for Workforce Investment Act and Wagner-Peyser-Funded 
programs.  The Employment and Training Administration has released Training and 
Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) 11-11, which provides information on the Selective 
Service registration requirements for Workforce Investment Act-funded services established 
by the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) § 189(h), codified at 20 CFR 667.250, and the 
Military Selective Service Act (50 U.S.C. App. 453), codified at 32 CFR Part 1605. To view 
the TEGL, visit:  http://wdr.doleta.gov/directives/corr_doc.cfm?docn=9313. 
 
U.S. Departments of Education and Defense to Launch “Learning Registry” Tools 
and Community.  The U.S. Departments of Education and Defense announced the launch 
of “Learning Registry,” an open source community and technology system designed to 
improve the quality and availability of learning resources in education.  The Learning 
Registry is also a communication system that allows existing educational portals and online 
systems to publish, consume and share important information about learning resources with 
each other and the public, while respecting the privacy of individual users.  For further 
details about the Department of Education's involvement in Learning Registry and related 
initiatives, contact the Department's Office of Education Technology.  To obtain additional 
information, visit: http://www.learningregistry.org/.  To view the press release, visit: 
http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/departments-education-and-defense-launch-
learning-registry-tools-and-community. 
 
 
YYoouutthh  R
Reessoouurrccee  CCoonnnneeccttiioonnss  
TTeecchhnniiccaall  AAssssiissttaannccee  UUppddaattee  ffoorr  NNoovveem
mbbeerr  22001111  
1
FUNDING ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 
U.S. Department of Education Awards TRIO Grants.  The U.S. Department of 
Education has awarded TRIO Educational Opportunity Centers (EOC) program grants to 128 
grantees in 44 states and Puerto Rico.  The grants will fund counseling services and 
information on college admissions to qualified individuals who want to enter, or continue a 
program of postsecondary education.  To view the press release, visit: 
http://www2.ed.gov/programs/trioeoc/index.html. 
 
 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR YOUTH, YOUNG ADULTS, AND TEACHERS  
 
The Brown Rudnick Charitable Foundation Corp. Unveils New Grant Program 
Designed to Help Inner-City Educators.  The Brown Rudnick Charitable Foundation 
Corp. is accepting applications for its Community Grant Program.  The program was created 
to support frontline educators and will subsidize small, concrete projects to improve inner-
city education in Boston, Hartford, Providence, or New York City.  Eligible applicants must 
be a "frontline educational worker" who is involved in education or a related field in one of 
the noted communities eligible for grants.  To obtain additional information and an 
application, visit:  
http://www.brownrudnickcenter.com/foundation/communitygrant.asp.   
Deadline: Rolling. 
 
The Alliance for Young Artists & Writers Invites Entries for its Scholastic Art & 
Writing Awards.  The Alliance for Young Artists & Writers is accepting entries from 
creative teens for its 2012 Scholastic Art & Writing Awards.  The awards are designed to 
recognize talented teen artists and writers in the United States and Canada.  Applicants are 
invited to submit work in twenty-eight categories of art and writing, including film and 
animation, video game design, sculpture, photography, fashion design, poetry, journalism, 
humor, dramatic script, and science fiction.  Eligible applicants must be students in grades 
7-12 in a public, private, parochial, home-school, or out of school program in the U.S. or 
Canada, or in an American school abroad.  Fifteen graduating high school seniors will be 
awarded with Portfolio Gold Medals, which include a $10,000 scholarship.  To obtain 
additional information and an application, visit:  
http://www.artandwriting.org/.  Deadline:  December 15; January 15, 2012. 
 
 
Youth Service America and Sodexo Foundation Invites Applications for its Sodexo 
Youth Grants.  Youth Service America and Sodexo Foundation are accepting applications 
for its Sodexo Youth Grants.  The grants are designed to recognize service projects that 
engage students' peers, friends, families, neighbors, Sodexo employees, and other 
community members in creative youth-inspired solutions to ending childhood hunger in their 
communities.  Eligible applicants must be between the ages of 5 and 25.  Awardees will 
receive $500.  To obtain additional information and an application, visit: 
http://www.ysa.org/grants/sodexoyouth/.  Deadline:  January 17, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
YYoouutthh  R
Reessoouurrccee  CCoonnnneeccttiioonnss  
TTeecchhnniiccaall  AAssssiissttaannccee  UUppddaattee  ffoorr  NNoovveem
mbbeerr  22001111  
2
 
PeyBack Foundation Accepting Applications for At-Risk Youth Programs in Indiana, 
Louisiana, and Tennessee.  The PeyBack Foundation is accepting applications for its 
2012 PeyBack Foundation Grant.  This grant is designed to recognize programs that have a 
direct benefit to children through relationships and activities.  Eligible applicants must be 
nonprofit 501(c)(3) organizations serving economically disadvantaged children between the 
ages of 6 and 18 in Indiana, Tennessee, and the New Orleans metropolitan area.  Awards 
will range up to $15,000.  To obtain additional information and an application, visit: 
http://www.peytonmanning.com/2012-peyback-foundation-grant-application-now-
available.php.  Deadline:  February 1, 2012. 
 
 
PUBLICATIONS 
 
Career Clusters:  Forecasting Demand for High School through College Jobs, 2008-
2018.  This report developed by Anthony P. Carnevale, Nichole Smith, James R. Stone III, 
Pradeep Kotamraju, Bruce Seuernagel, and Kimberly A. Greeen, identifies 16 career clusters 
that represent the full array of related occupational opportunities and education 
requirements.  Report findings indicate that for those with high school diplomas, decent jobs 
still exist, but there are not enough to go around.  Only one in three of high school-level 
jobs will pay wages of $35,000 or more; in some cases, with experience, these jobs can 
provide wages up to $50,000.  In addition to the full national report, Career Clusters 
contains an executive summary and a state-level analysis of jobs by career cluster.  All 
three documents are available online at:  http://cew.georgetown.edu/Clusters. 
 
Federal Education Tax Benefits:  Who Receives Education Tax Benefits and the 
Effect These Benefits Have on the Price of College Attendance?  This report 
developed by the U.S. Department of Education’s National Center for Education Statistics at 
the Institute of Education Sciences, applies IRS rules and data to a nationally representative 
sample of 2007–08 undergraduates to estimate who received education tax benefits and 
looks at the extent to which these benefits shaped their price of college attendance.  To 
view the report, visit: 
http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2012212. 
 
Who Enrolls in Dual Enrollment and Other Acceleration Programs in Florida High 
Schools?  This study developed by Angela Estacion, Bridget A. Cotner, Stephanie D’Souza, 
Chrystal A.S. Smith, and Kathryn M. Borman, examines dual enrollment programs in Florida 
(collaborative programs allowing high school students to enroll in college-level courses and 
earn credit toward both a high school diploma and a college degree or a career preparatory 
certificate) and compares them with other acceleration programs offered, such as Advanced 
Placement (AP), International Baccalaureate (IB), and Advanced International Certificate of 
Education (AICE).  The study also describes the number and characteristics of grade 11 and 
12 students enrolled in acceleration programs overall and by district during 2006/07 and it 
examines dual enrollment partnerships between high schools and colleges in nine sample 
school districts.  To view the study, visit: 
http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs/projects/project.asp?ProjectID=288. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
YYoouutthh  R
Reessoouurrccee  CCoonnnneeccttiioonnss  
TTeecchhnniiccaall  AAssssiissttaannccee  UUppddaattee  ffoorr  NNoovveem
mbbeerr  22001111  
3
 
PROGRAM RESOURCES 
 
On November 29, the Bureau of Labor Statistics hosted a Webinar entitled:  Overview of 
the BLS National Longitudinal Surveys Program.  This webinar featured the U.S. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics National Longitudinal Surveys.  Assistant Director Jay 
Meisenheimer provided an overview of the Bureau of Labor Statistics National Longitudinal 
Surveys program, the population groups that have been surveyed by BLS, and the types of 
information collected in the surveys.  Other topics discussed included:  Who uses NLS data?, 
examples of the types of research questions that have been examined using NLS data, and 
how to obtain NLS data and documentation.  To view and listen to the archived Webinar, 
visit:  http://apdu.org/. 
 
National Center for Educational Statistics Announces Release of High School 
Career/Technical Education Participation Web Tables.  The National Center for 
Educational Statistics (NCES) released a set of six tables that presents information on the 
participation of public high school graduates of the class of 2009 in career/technical 
education (CTE).  The tables also include the percentage of graduates who earned credits in 
CTE overall, as well as in various occupational areas within CTE, and the average number of 
credits earned in CTE and in occupational areas.  Three tables focus on graduates in 2009, 
and three tables look at participation trends from 1990 to 2009.  To view the tables, visit: 
http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/ctes/tables/index.asp?LEVEL=SECONDARY. 
 
Federal Communications Commission Offering Low-Cost Broadband & Computers 
for Students & Families.  The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) will launch 
"Connect to Compete," an initiative to bring low-cost broadband and computers to millions 
of low-income Americans, in the spring of 2012.  Under this initiative, families eligible for 
the National School Lunch Program can receive discounted monthly broadband internet, a 
computer, and free digital literacy training.  To obtain additional information, visit: 
http://www.fcc.gov/blog/low-cost-broadband-and-computers-students-and-families. 
 
 
WEB SITE 
 
National Center for Educational Statistics Announces Release of New State-Level 
Data on State Education Reforms Website.  The National Center for Educational 
Statistics announced the release of new state-level data on open enrollment policies 
available on the State Education Reforms website.  The State Education Reforms website, 
which draws primarily on data collected by organizations other than NCES, compiles and 
disseminates data on state-level education reform efforts in five areas:  1) Accountability; 
2) Assessment and standards;3) Staff qualifications and development; 4) State support for 
school choice and other options; and 5) Student readiness and progress through school.  To 
view the Web site, visit:  http://nces.ed.gov/programs/statereform/. 
 
 
CALENDAR OF EVENTS 
 
 
March 4-7.  Tampa, FL.  University of South Florida 25th Annual Children’s Mental Health 
Research & Policy Conference.  To obtain additional information, visit: 
http://cmhtampaconference.com/. 
 
 
 
YYoouutthh  R
Reessoouurrccee  CCoonnnneeccttiioonnss  
TTeecchhnniiccaall  AAssssiissttaannccee  UUppddaattee  ffoorr  NNoovveem
mbbeerr  22001111  
4
NOTICE: 
 
The Employment and Training Administration is interested in hearing about new 
and innovative approaches which bring employers, educators and workforce 
systems professionals together to serve our communities’ youth.  If you would like  
 
to share projects or programs in your area, please e-mail your information to the 
Division of Youth Services at youth.services@dol.gov. 
 
Thank you. 
 
  
 Youth Resource Connections (YRC).  The Department of Labor (DOL), Employment and Training Administration (ETA) does 
not take responsibility for non endorsed DOL/ETA resources included in the YRC.  
 
We welcome your input.  Please let us know how these updates might be improved to better serve your needs.  If you have 
comments contact the: Division of Youth Services at (202) 693-3030 or e-mail youth.services@dol.gov .  
 
Subscribe/Unsubscribe to Youth Resource Connections: http://www.doleta.gov/youth_services.  Click on the “Subscribe 
to E-mail Updates” button to complete subscription. 
YYoouutthh  R
Reessoouurrccee  CCoonnnneeccttiioonnss  
TTeecchhnniiccaall  AAssssiissttaannccee  UUppddaattee  ffoorr  NNoovveem
mbbeerr  22001111  
5
