233 South Wacker Drive
Suite 800, Sears Tower 
Chicago, IL 60606
312-454-0400 (voice)
312-454-0411 (fax)
www.cmap.illinois.gov
 
 
 
To: 
Transportation Committee 
 
Date: August 13, 2008 
 
From: Bob Dean, Principal Regional Planner 
 
Re: 
Scenario Construction 
 
 
A central piece of the GO TO 2040 planning process is the evaluation of alternative future 
scenarios.  Scenarios are combinations of actions (policies, strategies, and investments) that 
represent alternative paths that the region could take toward reaching its desired future, as 
expressed in the Regional Vision.  The purpose of the scenario evaluation process is not to 
select one single scenario that will be adopted in its entirety.  Instead, it is meant to allow us 
to examine different potential paths that the region could take toward the realization of its 
vision.  Ultimately, the most effective pieces from each one of the scenarios will be chosen 
and combined into a preferred scenario.  
 
Below are draft recommendations from staff concerning the identities of the alternative 
future scenarios that will be under consideration.  Please note that these descriptions focus 
primarily on the transportation aspects of each scenario; each will also have detailed 
environmental, economic, housing, land use, and other components. 
 
• 
Scenario 1: This will be a reference scenario, describing what will happen if we 
continue on our current path.  This is mostly produced for the purposes of 
comparison.  It will demonstrate that our current trends will lead to an undesirable 
future, and that action and change is needed. 
 
• 
Scenario 2: This scenario will focus on preserving those aspects of the region that we 
value most, including open space, affordable housing, historic buildings, etc.  In the 
transportation area, this scenario will include measures that preserve the function of 
our transportation system without requiring major infrastructure investment.  It will 
have non-capital intensive features like improved pedestrian and bicycle facilities, 
car-sharing, transit operating improvements, transportation demand management 
(TDM) techniques, and access management along arterials, for example.  Although 
this scenario does not have extensive investment in physical improvements, it will 
invest more heavily in education, workforce development, and similar actions. 
 
 
1 
• 
Scenario 3: This scenario will reinvest heavily in our existing communities and 
infrastructure.  “Existing communities” are defined here as those areas where 
development already exists.  Transportation investments will be sizable, and will 
primarily include reconstruction or expansion of existing infrastructure, both transit 
and road (as well as other non-transportation infrastructure).  This focuses our 
infrastructure investments on existing communities, trying to use existing assets as 
much as possible.  Improvements to the region’s freight infrastructure will be an 
explicit part of this scenario.  Land use patterns will follow infrastructure 
investments, leading to development that is transit-oriented and mixed-use. 
 
• 
Scenario 4: This scenario will focus on innovation, in terms of new technologies or 
policy solutions, to reach our vision.  In the area of transportation, it will feature 
extensive use of Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) solutions, variable pricing, 
alternative energy and fuels, and facility design that takes advantage of the latest (or 
anticipated) technologies; non-technological innovations such as context sensitivity 
are also part of this scenario.  Improved communications capabilities may also 
reduce demand on the transportation system overall.  Transportation facilities that 
support innovative development nearby are also included in this scenario.  This is 
expected to feature the development of currently undeveloped land, but the negative 
impacts of this development are minimized through innovative solutions like 
conservation design techniques. 
 
The alternative scenarios will not include specific major capital projects, but will instead 
focus on systematic improvements that can be made to the transportation system.  The 
proposed approach for addressing major capital projects will be brought to the 
Transportation committee for discussion at the September meeting. 
 
More information on the options that were examined in determining this scenario 
construction framework is included in the attached document. 
 
ACTION REQUESTED: Discussion. 
 
 
2 
Scenario construction process 
DRAFT – 8/13/08 
 
Description of thematic scenarios 
 
At working committee meetings in June 2008, staff presented several options for the 
construction of alternative scenarios.  There was general agreement that we construct our 
scenarios using a thematic method.  In thematic scenario construction, each scenario is a 
combination of individual strategies, or a course of action.  The strategies can be grouped 
into thematic scenarios by any method desired; the process for this proposed for CMAP will 
be described later. 
 
The purpose of the scenario evaluation process is not to select one single scenario that will be 
adopted in its entirety.  Instead, it is meant to allow us to examine different potential paths 
that the region could take toward the realization of its vision.  Ultimately, the most effective 
pieces from each one of the scenarios will be chosen and combined into a preferred scenario. 
 
A thematic organization was chosen after examining various other possible methods for 
scenario construction, including: 
• 
Varying scenarios by intensity, as in the Envision Utah process.  In this construction 
method, one scenario includes no good planning, one includes lots of good planning, 
and the others vary between these bookends.  This model is useful for establishing 
that there is support for planning in general, but it does not help very much in 
prioritizing actions.  Therefore, this is more useful for organizations that are trying to 
create broad support for planning, something that CMAP assumes already exists in 
this region.  However, this method still may have value in terms of communication 
with the general public. 
• 
Maximizing one goal over another.  For example, an environmental scenario could be 
created which focuses on achieving our environmental goals, and this could be tested 
against an economic or an equity-focused scenario.  While this method is fairly 
simple and easy to explain, it also leads to false choices (environmental actions can 
also be economically beneficial, for example), and it would pit groups of stakeholders 
against each other unproductively. 
• 
Focus on investment in different areas.  This method assumes that many of our 
region’s resources are committed to maintaining our infrastructure, education, health 
care, and other systems, but that there is a certain amount of discretionary funding.  
Scenarios constructed using this method would focus the investment of this 
discretionary funding on infrastructure versus education, for example.  While this is 
an interesting public policy question (how best can the public sector use its 
resources), it leads to the same unrealistic tradeoffs described above.  Additionally, 
the focus on public sector investment ignores the role of private sector investment or 
other public sector actions such as regulation. 
• 
Assigning growth to one area or another.  This method would forecast population 
and jobs for different geographies and then adjust these forecasts to determine the 
 
3 
effect of faster population growth in Kane County, for example.  This method is 
undesirable given the consensus-based nature of CMAP’s decision-making.  Also, it 
is unrealistic, because neither CMAP nor any other group has the ability to simply 
shift jobs and people between jurisdictions.  While it may lead to interesting results 
concerning the effects of growth in one area or another, it does not lead to a 
prioritization of strategies. 
 
Within thematic scenario construction, there are a variety of ways to assign strategies to 
different scenarios.  It is proposed that CMAP involve its stakeholders and committees in 
this process, as described later in this document. 
 
Key standards met through use of thematic scenarios 
 
Before the decision that thematic scenario construction was the right method, a number of 
baseline scenario features were established to guide the choice of the best scenario 
construction method.  These included the following: 
• 
Scenarios should be logical and internally consistent, and should also be reasonable 
views of the future, rather than “straw men” which exist to be destroyed.  Thematic 
scenarios can provide more realistic futures than the other methods, which tend 
toward extremes. 
• 
The purpose of scenarios is to prioritize actions for implementation.  Because 
thematic scenarios are combinations of actions, they can do this.  (So could several 
other of the scenario construction methods, as well.) 
• 
In comparison to the reference scenario, each scenario should lead to an overall 
improvement in environmental quality, economic competitiveness, equity, and other 
vision themes.  Thematic scenarios can be constructed in a way to ensure that each 
contains strategies to improve the environment, economy, etc.  Other scenario 
options, such as the maximizing of one goal over another, would tend to be less 
balanced, and in some cases, it would be difficult to ensure that this standard were 
met (for example, an economically-focused scenario could easily have a negative 
effect on the environment.) 
• 
Minimum standards or “floors” should be included in each scenario for basic 
maintenance of the system, continued funding for education, an acceptable level of 
planning for safety and security, etc.  This could actually be accomplished through 
any of the scenario construction methods. 
• 
Cost constraints should be clear.  This can either be accomplished through holding 
costs equal and ensuring that all scenarios cost the same, or by explicitly stating the 
tradeoffs between benefits and costs (such as higher taxes).  Because thematic 
scenarios are combinations of explicit strategies, either of these methods can work 
with a thematic scenario construction method. 
• 
Scenarios should be treated as examples that illustrate potential futures, not the full 
range of futures that are available to the region.  This is a key consideration in 
thematic scenarios, and one way in which they may be more difficult to use than 
other options.  They will appear to have a degree of arbitrariness to anyone not 
 
4 
involved in their construction.  For example, it is easy to understand that an 
“environment vs economy vs equity” tradeoff is done to provoke thought and 
discussion.  Because the choices involved in thematic scenarios are not so simplistic, 
and the future they describe are more realistic, they may be viewed by some as actual 
choices rather than illustrations. 
• 
Scenarios should be designed with public communication in mind.  This will be a 
greater challenge for thematic scenarios than for others.  However, it is more 
important to select a scenario construction process that allows the most robust 
analysis possible.  Given sufficient effort and creativity, even the most complex 
processes can be communicated to the public. 
 
In addition to these standards established ahead of time, a number of issues were discussed 
at the working committee meetings which can be accommodated within thematic scenario 
construction.  A key issue was the responsiveness of scenarios to outside forces, such as 
energy prices, overall global economic conditions, and climate change.  This can be 
addressed by doing “robustness testing” after scenarios are constructed.  For each scenario, 
we can ask how much sense that particular combination of actions would make in a future 
with considerably higher energy prices, for example.  Energy usage is likely to be calculated 
for each scenario, so it would be a simple matter to identify the most and least energy-
efficient scenarios.  This may not matter for decision-making now; we need to select a 
preferred set of actions based on the best information that we currently have.  But as we get 
a clearer picture of the future of energy prices, we can re-prioritize our strategies based on 
our changing expectations. 
 
Another critical issue was the place of Chicago within the global economy, as it is clear that 
global trends do affect the region.  There are a variety of actions that can be take in response 
to this, ranging from increased local food production, to specializing in green architecture, to 
centralizing our position as an international freight hub, to trying to save our manufacturing 
jobs, etc.  Which one of these courses of action makes most sense depends largely on one’s 
future expectations.  However, regardless of this, the plan needs to directly address our 
place within the global economy.   
 
Request for comments 
 
CMAP staff have developed some potential courses of action, included as a separate 
attachment, that could be included as components of alternative scenarios.  These are meant 
as a starting point for discussion.  Please recall when reviewing these that a preferred 
scenario will likely contain elements from each of these – the purpose of the scenarios is to 
examine different alternatives and spark discussion about our priorities for actions and 
investments. 
 
 
5 
