BEFORE THE TAX COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF IDAHO 
 
 
DOCKET NO.  16003 
 
DECISION 
In the Matter of the Protest of 
 
[REDACTED], 
 
                         Petitioner. 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
On August 7, 2001, the Tax Discovery Bureau (Bureau) of the Idaho State Tax Commission 
issued a Notice of Deficiency Determination to [Redacted] (taxpayer), proposing income tax, 
penalty, and interest for 1996 and 1997 in the total amount of $4,793. 
The taxpayer filed a timely appeal.  He did not request a hearing, but he submitted additional 
information.  The Tax Commission, having reviewed the file, hereby issues its decision based upon 
the information contained in the file.   
 
Because Tax Commission records showed the taxpayer had not filed Idaho resident income tax 
returns for the years 1996 and 1997, the Bureau conducted research to verify the taxpayer’s residency 
and filing requirement.  The taxpayer’s residency was confirmed and Idaho source income was 
identified for each year.  
 
[Redacted].  [Redacted].  [Redacted]. 
 
Idaho Code § 63-3045 (1)(a) states: 
 
63-3045.  Notice of redetermination or deficiency -- 
Interest.  (1)  (a) If, in the case of any taxpayer, the state tax 
commission determines that there is a deficiency in respect of the tax 
imposed by this title, the state tax commission shall, immediately 
upon discovery thereof, send notice of such deficiency to the taxpayer 
by registered or certified mail or by other commercial delivery 
service providing proof of delivery, whichever is the most cost 
efficient. The notice shall be sent to the taxpayer's last address known 
to the state tax commission. The notice of deficiency shall be 
accompanied by an explanation of the specific reason for the 
determination and an explanation of the taxpayer's right to appeal. 
DECISION -1 
[Redacted] 
Within sixty-three (63) days after such notice is mailed, the taxpayer 
may, at his option, file a protest in writing with the state tax 
commission and obtain redetermination of the deficiency.
 
 
The taxpayer did not respond to correspondence.  Therefore, the Bureau issued a Notice of 
Deficiency Determination.  In response to the notice, the taxpayer sent a letter of appeal.  He said he 
was disputing the determination because he was married and had two minor children living with him 
during both of the years at issue.  He included a date of birth and a social security number for his 
wife and each child.  In addition, he said the actual 1997 income amount was less than the amount 
the Bureau used to determine the Idaho tax due for that year.  The taxpayer furnished no further 
information. 
 
The Bureau expanded its research to determine the accuracy of the taxpayer’s claims.  
Because the information provided by the taxpayer appeared to be more accurate than the information 
used to prepare the deficiency notice, the Bureau sent the taxpayer a revised determination.  The 
amended determination did not include a deficiency for 1997 because the new computation resulted 
in no tax due.  The Bureau advised the taxpayer the determination of a deficiency for 1997 was 
canceled and asked him to accept the revised amounts for 1996.  The taxpayer did not respond and 
his file was transferred to the Legal/Tax Policy Division for administrative review.  
 
On April 12, 2002, the Tax Commission received the taxpayer’s Idaho returns for the years 
1997, 1998, and 1999 along with a letter that was signed by the taxpayer.  In the letter, the taxpayer 
said he had decided to withdraw his protest regarding the 1996 tax year and accept the Bureau’s 
revised determination of tax due.   
 
Secondly, the taxpayer asked to have the refund shown in his 1997 Idaho return applied 
against his 1996 liability.  He said he was not aware of a statute that allows a taxing authority to 
withhold refunds while continuing to collect taxes beyond a specific time frame.   
DECISION -2 
[Redacted] 
 
Idaho Code limits the time allowed for a refund to be credited or refunded.  Idaho Code  
§ 63-3072(c) states: 
 
Idaho Code § 63-3072.  Credits and Refunds. . . . 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of section 63-3035, Idaho 
Code, a claim for credit or refund of tax, penalties, or interest paid 
shall be made within the later of three (3) years of the due date of the 
return, without regard to extensions, or three (3) years from the date 
the return was filed.  However, with regard to remittances received 
with an extension of time to file, or a tentative return, a claim for 
credit or refund of such remittances shall be made within three (3) 
years from the due date of the return without regard to extensions.   
 
 
Idaho Code § 63-3035(e) limits the time for an employee to claim a credit or refund of 
monies that have been deducted from wages as follows: 
 
Idaho Code § 63-3035. . . .(e)  Amounts deducted from 
wages of an employee during any calendar year in accordance with 
the provisions of this section shall be considered to be in part 
payment of the tax imposed on such employee for his tax year which 
begins within such calendar year and the return made by the 
employer under this subsection (e) shall be accepted by the state tax 
commission as evidence in favor of the employee of the amount so 
deducted from his wages.  Where the total amount so deducted 
exceeds the amount of tax on the employee, based on his Idaho 
taxable income, or where his income is not taxable under this act, the 
state tax commission shall, after examining the annual return filed by 
the employee in accordance with this act, but not later than sixty (60) 
days after the filing of each return, refund the amount of the excess 
deducted.  No credit or refund shall be made to an employee who 
fails to file his return, as required under this act, within three (3) 
years from the due date of the return, without regard to 
extensions, in respect of which the tax withheld might have been 
credited.  In the event that the excess tax deducted is less than one 
dollar ($1.00), no refund shall be made unless specifically requested 
by the taxpayer at the time such return is filed.  (Emphasis added.) 
 
 
Idaho Code § 63-3032 defines the due date of Idaho income tax returns: 
 
Idaho Code § 63-3032.  Time for filing income tax returns. 
(1) Except as provided in section 63-3033, Idaho Code: 
 
(a) Returns made on the basis of the calendar year shall be 
filed in the office of the Idaho state tax commission on or 
before the 15th day of April following the close of the 
DECISION -3 
[Redacted] 
calendar year and returns made on the basis of a fiscal year 
shall be filed in the office of the Idaho state tax commission 
on or before the 15th day of the fourth month following the 
close of the fiscal year.   
 
The taxpayer had a requirement to file an Idaho individual income tax return for both 1996 
and 1997.  He did not file either return in a timely manner as required by Idaho Code.  In fact, he did 
not file the 1997 return until April 12, 2002, long after the Bureau contacted him.  He did not 
complete and file a return for 1996.  Rather, the taxpayer accepted the Bureau’s determination for 
that year.   
 
The taxpayer’s request for a credit or refund of the amount shown as a refund in the 1997 
Idaho income tax return the taxpayer submitted for filing with the Tax Commission on  
April 12, 2002, is denied. 
 
WHEREFORE, the Notice of Deficiency Determination dated August 7, 2001, is hereby 
MODIFIED, and as so modified, is APPROVED, AFFIRMED, and MADE FINAL. 
IT IS ORDERED and THIS DOES ORDER that the taxpayer pay the following tax, penalty, 
and interest. 
YEAR
TAX
PENALTY
INTEREST
TOTAL
1996 
1997 
$291 
      0 
$73 
    0 
$116 
      0 
$480 
      0
 
 
 
TOTAL DUE 
$480 
 
Interest is computed through May 1, 2002. 
 
DEMAND for immediate payment of the foregoing amount is hereby made and given. 
 
An explanation of taxpayer’s right to appeal this decision is enclosed with this decision. 
 
DATED this _____ day of ________________, 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IDAHO STATE TAX COMMISSION 
 
 
DECISION -4 
[Redacted] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE  
 
 
I hereby certify that I have on this _____ day of _________________, 2002, served a copy of the 
within and foregoing DECISION by sending the same by United States mail, postage prepaid, in an 
envelope addressed to: 
[Redacted] 
 
 
 
Receipt No. [Redacted]
[Redacted]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT 1 
DECISION -5 
[Redacted] 
