DHS Science and Technology Directorate 
 Geospatial Location Accountability and Navigation 
System for Emergency Responders     Know WHERE they are… 
 
support nationwide interoperability and other capabilities con-
sistent with the national preparedness goals. 
Precision Indoor Location and Tracking 
The Geospatial Location Accountability and Navigation Sys-
tem for Emergency Responders (GLANSER) project is a part 
of the First Responder Technology Program within DHS S&T 
Directorate, Infrastructure Protection Disaster Management Di-
vision (IDD). The GLANSER project satisfies the Incident Man-
agement Integrated Projects Team’s high-priority technological 
need for personnel monitoring. The project builds on previous 
efforts from S&T concept exploration of Advance 3-D Location 
System effort (RTAP BAA05-01 EH4) and the 3-D Visualization 
System to show First Responders and Assets within Building 
Structures in Urban Areas for Situational Awareness effort 
(SBIR06.02-005). The primary objectives of GLANSER are: 
Key Contributions and Deliverables from Science 
and Technology 
GLANSER will provide position information, alarms, communi-
cations, and visual presentations to incident commanders. Ad-
vances in science and technology from this project include de-
veloping technology to increase 3-D positional accuracy to with-
in 3 meters in non-GPS environments, increase communication 
range in complex indoor non-line-of-sight environments, provide 
device operational life up to 6 hours, and to decrease overall 
package weight to less than 2 lb. Project deliverables include: 
wearable 3-D Locator Pack(s) for Responders; robust wireless 
mesh data network with 2-way alarm/status communications; 
and 3-D Visualization user interface product for responder’s geo-
referenced location and tracks for the Incident Command Post.  
•
Improve the precision of locating first responders dur-
ing an incident in complex environments and in non-
GPS environments (i.e. subterranean structures, col-
lapsed buildings, sky-scrapers)
•
Provide incident commanders the ability to accurately
locate and track hundreds of personnel in real-time to
rapidly and effectively re-deploy and save at-risk re-
sponders during an incident
Customers, Users, Partnerships, and 
Stakeholders 
The primary customer for this project is the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA). When delivered, the system sup-
ports a multitude of State/Local Emergency Managers and First 
Responders, who are the ultimate end-users of the product. In 
addition, S&T is working to leverage existing efforts being done 
in the Department of Defense (DOD) and other agencies.  
•
Increase situational awareness of the incident by
providing a 2D/3D view of the building superimposed
with the locations of the first responders and their status
through a 2-way alarm/status communication feature.
Transitioning technology to the Emergency 
Responder 
The GLANSER system is being field-tested with numerous fire 
departments across the country to assess performance, reliability, 
ease of deployment and use, interoperability, and consistency 
with first responder procedures and equipment. Feedback from 
these field trials will be used to further improve the technology 
and packaging to make it feasible for commercialization. The 
initial strategy consists of FEMA endorsement of the product for 
use by end-users through Authorized Equipment List (AEL) and 
the Interagency Board (IAB) Standardized Equipment List 
(SEL). Also being discussed is procurement of the system 
through Commercial Equipment Direct Assistance Program 
(CEDAP) in FEMA. 
Operational concept for GLANSER 
This project saves the lives of first responders by allowing the 
Incident Command Post to track, locate, and direct teams to res-
cue 
at-risk/down 
personnel 
during 
emergency 
events. 
GLANSER increases responder survivability by allowing for 
quicker egress of an incident using logged track information. In 
addition, the system will provide HSPD-8 compliance through 
adoption of appropriate first responder equipment standards that 
To learn more about GLANSER, contact Jalal Mapar, Director RSD, at 
jalal.mapar@hq.dhs.gov 
2013-03-20 
