Geological Time Capsule, Part I  
by Kenn Oberrecht  
 
 
 
Earth's earliest life forms 
appeared during the Proterozoic 
Period. 
In geological terms, earth's history unfolds in a succession of 
human-defined time divisions that embrace thousands, millions, 
even billions of years. The basic unit of geologic time is the 
period, which comprises two or more epochs. An era is a major 
division consisting of two or more periods. There are longer 
and shorter divisions, but these three serve well in any 
description of the features and events that helped shape the 
earth into the planet we know and formed the environment in 
which we exist.  
 
Beginning some five billion years ago, the Archeozoic Period is the 
earliest division of the Precambrian Era. During that time, the earth's crust 
gradually solidified. The barren continents that formed then were about 
only one-eighth the size of current continents. The atmosphere had 
excessive carbon dioxide, no free oxygen, and no ozone to mitigate the 
effects of the sun's fierce ultraviolet radiation.  
The age of marine invertebrates 
dawned, and shellfish flourished, 
as did echinoderms, early 
ancestors of the sea stars, sea 
urchins, and sea cucumbers.  
 
The Devonian Period 
marked the age of fishes, 
405 million years ago. 
The Proterozoic Period of the Precambrian Era began about 2.5 billion 
years ago. During this time of relative calm, continents increased to nearly 
their present size and formed a great supercontinent. Huge bodies of 
molten matter known as magma were trapped inside the earth's crust. As 
they cooled, minerals crystallized and settled out, and great layers of metal 
formed in the crust.  
 
Earth's earliest life forms appeared during the Proterozoic Period. Blue-
green algae began thriving, photosynthesizing, and pumping free oxygen 
into the atmosphere. Bacteria and primitive multicellular life forms 
appeared.  
 
The Cambrian was the first period of the Paleozoic Era, occurring 570 
million years ago, when the earth's landmasses settled in a broad 
equatorial band. The largest, which geologists call Gondwana, comprised 
what we now know as South America, Africa, India, Australia, and 
Antarctica. 
 
Extensive seafloor spreading created high mid-ocean ridges that displaced 
water and raised sea levels worldwide. Encroaching waters flooded 
continental lowlands, forming vast, warm, shallow seas, conducive to the 
development of new species. A greater abundance of free oxygen gave rise 
to the emergence of many new life forms. The age of marine invertebrates 
dawned, and shellfish flourished, as did echinoderms, early ancestors of 
the sea stars, sea urchins, and sea cucumbers.  
 
About 450 million years ago, during the Ordovician Period, Europe and 
North America began to drift nearer each other. In the ocean that 
eventually developed into the Atlantic, islands collided and crumbled, 
creating jagged peaks along the continental shelf. Fungi, seaweed, and the 
first primitive fishes appeared. 
  
The Silurian Period began 435 million years ago. Ozone was accumulating 
in the upper atmosphere then, forming a layer dense enough to filter most 
of the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays. The first land plants appeared and 
began to colonize. Modern fungi appeared, and shellfish became abundant.  
 
The Devonian Period marked the age of fishes, 405 million years ago. 
Earth's first amphibians appeared then, along with primitive insects and 
land animals. The earliest trees began growing in the lowlands and 
colonizing to form earth's first forests.  
 
Earth had aged billions of years and had become hospitable enough for 
complex plants and animals to exist. But more than 340 million years 
would pass before the primitive ancestors of modern humans would leave 
footprints in the volcanic ash of Africa's Great Rift Valley. 
