VIRGINIA REGISTER OF REGULATIONS 
VIRGINIA REGISTER NEWS 
News you can use 
OCTOBER 2009 
VOLUME 2, ISSUE 1 
RIS TRAINING 
Inside this issue: 
The Virginia Registrar's Office is presenting its RIS Basic and Intermediate Training Session 
on October 28, 2009.  Please let us know if you would like to attend the following session: 
October 28  — 10 - 11:30 a.m. RIS Basic Training  
RIS TRAINING 
1 
 
 
 
12:15 - 2 p.m.   RIS Intermediate Training  
REGULATION 
BREAKDOWN 
1 
Attendees may sign up for the morning session, afternoon session, or both.  
WHAT’S YOUR 
ISSUE? 
1 
WHERE: General Assembly Bldg, 6th Floor, DLAS training room.  
GETTING TO 
KNOW YOU 
2 
Seating is limited, so please make reservations with Terri Edwards at 
tedwards@dls.virginia.gov.  
INTEGRITY 
CHECK 
2 
If you would like to attend both morning and afternoon sessions, the cafeteria on the 6th 
Floor of the GAB is available for lunch purchases or for enjoying a lunch you bring.  
SEPTEMBER 
NOIRA 
9 
Proposed 
11 
Final 
27 
Fast-Track 
2 
Emergency 
1 
TOTAL 
50 
Virginia Register of Regulations, 910  
Capitol Street, 2nd Floor, Richmond, Vir-
ginia 23219, (804) 786-3591. 
WHAT’S YOUR ISSUE? 
For comments and questions contact Terri 
Edwards at tedwards@dls.virginia.gov. 
RIS automatically places a regulation in the next available Virginia Register volume and 
issue for publication when submitted from the Town Hall. Therefore, if you enter a later 
volume and issue  in Town Hall, rather than use the default, RIS still places it in the 
default issue. Be sure to call our office if you intend for your regulation to be published in 
an issue other than the default, and we will manually move it to the issue you specify. 
For the latest Virginia Register publication schedule, click here. 
PAGE 2 
VIRGINIA REGISTER NEWS 
Cindy has two children and a dog. She enjoys reading, 
spending time with friends, and doing most any kind of puzzle: 
crossword, suduko, daily jumble, and jigsaw. 
 “If anyone needs help with it 
(a regulation), contact the 
staff at the Registrar’s office.  
They’re the best.” 
 
- Cindy Berndt 
Cindy Berndt, the regulatory coordinator for the 
Department of Environmental Quality, started with the State 
Water Control Board 39 years ago.  The State Water Control 
Board then merged with the Department of Air Pollution 
Control, the Department of Waste Management, and the 
Council on the Environment to form the Department of 
Environmental Quality in 1993.  She became the regulatory 
coordinator for the Water Control Board in 1984 and for the 
Department of Environmental Quality in 1993. 
Over the years, Cindy has worn many different hats. In the 
early years, she worked in enforcement, before moving into 
the financial end doing contract management and financial 
services.  Since 1984, she has focused on regulation 
development through the APA.  She also serves as staff to the 
three regulatory Boards (Air, Waste, and Water).  
INTEGRITY -- WE ALL WANT IT! (PART I) 
With the implementation of RIS came the Integrity Check feature. Here's how it works and how you can use it to ensure the 
integrity of the sections you amend in the Virginia Administrative Code. Click "integ" in the list of RIS actions as shown. 
 
 
The program performs a document compare routine of all text in the current section in RIS with the text in the online VAC, but 
skips the following punctuation marks: commas, periods, semicolons and colons. This means it is up to agencies and the 
Registrar's staff to pay particular attention to those items. Parentheses are not skipped and are treated as "letters" in text so if a 
word with an opening or closing parenthesis is being amended, strike through the old word including the parenthesis and 
underscore the new word with the appropriate parenthesis. 
For example: (2004) (2008). 
 
For numbered lists, strike the number and its period and underscore the new number and its period. 
For example:  2. 3. 
Capitalization matters to the integrity check program. So, when adding text to the beginning of a sentence, strike the word with 
the uppercase first letter and underscore the word in lowercase. 
For example:  The Prior to submitting the application, the applicant shall ... 
What happens if the text does not match? 
Integrity check passed! 
Integrity check failed! 
If the text is an exact match, the program responds with     
If the text is not an exact match, the 
program responds with  
and marks the spot of the discrepancy with There's a problem starting here 
==> 
Check the text in the current online VAC to determine if a letter or word is inappropriately stricken, underscored, or missing.  
More ways to troubleshoot an integrity check failure in Part II of Integrity -- We all want it! 
