Department of Veterans Affairs 
VHA DIRECTIVE  1605 
Veterans Health Administration 
Transmittal Sheet 
Washington, DC  20420 
March 17, 2005 
 
VHA PRIVACY PROGRAM  
 
1.  REASON FOR ISSUE.  This Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Directive establishes 
a VHA-wide program for the protection of the privacy of veterans, their dependents, and 
beneficiaries in accordance with Federal privacy statutes and regulations, as well as establishes 
privacy policies to comply with the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Directive 6502.  
 
2.  SUMMARY OF CONTENTS/MAJOR CHANGES.  This VHA Directive sets forth: 
  
 
a.  Policy for the VHA Privacy Program. This policy requires VA-wide compliance with all 
applicable privacy laws, regulations, Executive Orders and implementation policies, guidance, 
directives, and handbooks.   
 
 
b.  Provision of the Freedom of Information Act, Privacy Act, Title 38 United States Code 
(U.S.C.) (U.S.C. Sections 5701, 5705, 7332), and Standard of Privacy of Individually-
Identifiable Health Information, 45 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Parts 160 and 164, hence 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule.  
 
 
c.  Responsibilities for implementing and managing the VHA-wide Privacy Program; and 
 
 
d.  References related to the VHA Privacy Program. 
 
3.  RELATED HANDBOOKS.  VHA Handbook 1605.1 and VHA Handbook 1605.2.   
 
4.  RESPONSIBLE OFFICE.  The VHA Office of Health Data and Informatics (19F) is 
responsible for the contents of this Directive.  Questions may be referred to the VHA Privacy 
Officer at 727-320-1839.   
 
5.  RESCISSIONS.  None. 
 
6.  RECERTIFICATION.  This VHA Directive is scheduled for recertification on or before the 
last day of March 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
S/ Jonathan Perlin, MD, PhD, MSHA, FACP  
 
Acting Under Secretary for Health 
 
DISTRIBUTION: CO: 
E-mailed 3/22/2005 
 
FLD: 
VISN, MA, DO, OC, OCRO, and 200 – E-mailed 3/22/2005 
 
 
 
T-1 
March 17, 2005 
VHA DIRECTIVE 1605 
 
 
VHA PRIVACY PROGRAM 
 
1.  PURPOSE: This VHA Directive provides policy and responsibilities for the VHA Privacy 
Program; and covers the responsibilities and requirements for compliance with all Federal 
confidentiality laws and regulations.   
 
2.  BACKGROUND: The VHA Privacy Program applies to: 
 
 
a.  Personal data that identifies an individual (herein referred to as “individually-identifiable 
information”) that is collected, created, transmitted, used, processed, stored, or disposed of by or 
for VHA; and 
 
 
b.  VHA components pertaining to all individually-identifiable information, which is 
maintained in any medium, including hard copy, microfilm, and electronic format and by 
information systems administrated by, or otherwise under the authority or control of, the 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 
 
3.  POLICY:  It is VHA policy that a VHA-wide Privacy Program be implemented through the 
VHA Privacy Office in the Office of Health Data and Informatics.  
 
4.  RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
 
a.  VHA Chief Health Informatics Officer (CHIO). The VHA CHIO is responsible for: 
 
 
(1)  Ensuring that Department-wide privacy policies and procedures are implemented 
through the VHA Privacy Program; and  
 
 
(2)  Seeking technical guidance and requirements for the protection of all privacy–protected 
data from the VA Privacy Service for the development and approval of cyber security 
acquisitions, budgeting, and funding. 
 
 
b.  VHA Privacy Officer.  The VHA Privacy Officer is responsible for: 
 
 
(1)  Performing all privacy duties and responsibilities as designated by the VA Privacy 
Service and VHA CHIO; 
 
 
(2)  Developing and implementing a VHA Privacy Program;  
 
 
(3)  Developing, issuing, reviewing, and coordinating privacy policy for VHA in conjunction 
with policy efforts by VA; 
 
 
(4)  Coordinating requirements and monitoring compliance with all Federal privacy law, 
regulations, and guidance with VHA; 
 
 
(5)  Issuing direction to facility-level Privacy Officers regarding all aspects of implementing 
the VHA Privacy Program; 
 
1 
VHA DIRECTIVE 1605 
March 17, 2005 
 
 
 
(6)  Establishing requirements for the responsibilities of facility-level Privacy Officers and 
providing implementation guidance, as needed; 
 
 
(7)  Providing VHA-specific privacy training tools and periodically monitoring compliance 
with the annual training requirement; 
 
 
(8)  Examining new or pending legislation, in conjunction with the Office of General 
Counsel, to determine the actual or potential impact of such legislation on privacy policy and/or 
practice at VHA; 
 
 
(9)  Establishing VHA policy on the reporting, tracking, resolution, and auditing of VHA 
privacy violations and complaints; 
 
 
(10)  Ensuring VHA resolves all privacy breaches in a timely fashion and in accordance with 
applicable law; 
 
 
(11)  Reporting all actual or suspected breaches of privacy of individually-identifiable 
information observed or received at the national level to the tracking service designated by the 
VA Privacy Service; 
 
 
(12)  Coordinating investigation of and response to privacy complaints received from the 
Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Civil Rights;  
 
 
(13)  Maintaining a Notice of Privacy Practices; and 
 
 
(14)  Providing expert guidance to the field in regard to the Privacy Act, Title 38 United 
States Code (U.S.C.) Sections 5701 and 7332, Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule, and other applicable Federal privacy laws. 
 
 
c.  Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN) Director and Chief Program Officers. 
The VISN Directors and Chief Program Officers are responsible for: 
 
 
(1)  Ensuring compliance within their respective programs with all Federal laws, regulations, 
VA regulation and policies, and VHA policies relating to privacy; 
 
 
(2)  Ensuring that all personnel within their respective programs attend annual privacy 
training in accordance with applicable requirements and VHA privacy policy; 
 
 
(3)  Ensuring that all personnel within their respective programs attend privacy training 
before they are granted access to any individually–identifiable information, and that personnel 
receive the follow-up privacy training periodically;  
 
 
(4)  Implementing the requirements of the VHA Privacy Program; and 
 
 
(5)  Designating an individual to provide guidance and oversight to ensure compliance with 
privacy regulations for their respective programs.  
 
2 
March 17, 2005 
VHA DIRECTIVE 1605 
 
 
 
d.  Medical Center Director.  The Medical Center Director is responsible for: 
 
 
(1)  Ensuring there is a Privacy Officer at the facility; and 
 
 
(2)  Ensuring facility policies and procedures consistent with polices contained in this 
Directive are established and distributed to all employees. 
 
 
e.  Privacy Officer. The Privacy Officer is assigned responsibility for: 
 
 
(1)  Developing facility privacy policies consistent with national privacy policies and 
monitoring compliance with such privacy policies;  
 
 
(2)  Reviewing or auditing all programs at the facility on a periodic basis to determine which 
programs collect, maintain, and store individually-identifiable information in order to ensure 
compliance with facility privacy policies; 
 
 
(3)  Reporting, in a timely manner, all actual or suspected breaches of privacy of all 
individually-identifiable information to the tracking service designated by the VA Privacy 
Service; and 
 
 
(4)  Providing expert guidance to the facility on all privacy related matters such as Privacy 
Act (PA), Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), HIPAA and 38 U.S.C. 
 
 
f.  VHA Personnel.  All VHA personnel are responsible for: 
 
 
(1)  Complying with all Federal laws and regulations, VA regulations and policies, and VHA 
policies relating to privacy; 
 
 
(2)  Completing privacy training at the time of employment, annually thereafter, and within 6 
months of a significant change in Federal law and regulation or VHA privacy policy;  
 
 
(3)  Reporting all actual or suspected breaches of privacy in a timely and complete manner to 
the appropriate privacy official; and 
 
 
(4)  Using, disclosing, or requesting individually-identifiable information to the minimum 
amount necessary required to perform their specific job function and to accomplish the intended 
purpose of the use, disclosure, or request. 
 
5.  REFERENCES 
 
 
a.  Title 38 U.S.C. 5701. 
 
 
b.  Title 38 U.S.C. 5705. 
 
 
c.  Title 38 U.S.C. 7332. 
 
 
3 
VHA DIRECTIVE 1605 
March 17, 2005 
 
 
d.  Title 38 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §§1.500-527. 
 
 
e.  Title 38 CFR §§17.500-511. 
 
 
f.  Title 38 CFR §§1.460-496. 
 
 
g.  Title 38 CFR §§1.550-557. 
 
 
h.  Title 38 CFR §§1.575-582. 
 
 
i.  Title 45 CFR, Parts 160 and 164. 
 
 
j.  Public Law 104-191. 
 
 
k.  Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Appendix I. 
 
 
l.  VA Directive 6502 
 
6.  DEFINITIONS 
 
 
a.  Compliance.  For the purpose of this Directive, the term “compliance” means the act of 
complying with policies, procedures, directives, laws, and other legal guidance.     
 
 
b.  Individually-Identifiable Information.  Individually-identifiable information is any 
information, including health information maintained by VHA, pertaining to an individual that 
also identifies the individual and, except for individually-identifiable health information, is 
retrieved by the individual’s name or other unique identifier.  Individually-identifiable health 
information is covered regardless of whether or not the information is retrieved by name. 
 
 
c.  Personnel.  For the purpose of this Directive, the term “personnel” includes those 
officers and employees of the Department; consultants and attending clinicians; without 
compensation (WOC) employees; contractors; others employed on a fee basis; medical students 
and other trainees; and volunteer workers rendering uncompensated services, excluding patient 
volunteers, providing a service at the direction of VA staff.  NOTE:  Compensated Work 
Therapy (CWT) workers are not VHA personnel; they are patients receiving active treatment or 
therapy. 
 
 
d.  VHA Privacy Program.  The VHA Privacy Program is the effort within VHA to 
establish and implement privacy policies and practices that comply with the requirements of all 
applicable Federal privacy laws and regulations, VA regulations and VA privacy policies.  The 
VHA Privacy Program at a minimum should address privacy policies, privacy training, use and 
disclosure of information, individual’s privacy rights, privacy complaints, notice of privacy 
practices and privacy compliance monitoring. 
 
 
 
4 
