April 18, 2008
  
Monterey Bay
  
National Marine Sanctuary
  
Sanctuary Advisory Council Meeting
  
Marine Protected Area Planning Process
  
The National Marine Sanctuaries Act 
•NMSA may complement single species management of the 
Magnuson-Stevens Act, the ESA and MMPA 
•Congress mandated that national marine sanctuaries be 
managed to protect biodiversity and ecosystem components 
•The NMSA provides for a comprehensive and coordinated 
approach to conservation and management of special marine 
areas: ecosystem-based management 
•Focus is on protection and management of natural habitats, 
populations, biological communities and ecological processes 
•
•
  
  
–
–
–
–
  
  
  
  
Tools to address impacts 
Seasonal upwelling, El nino, climate change, etc. 
Use of complementary tools to reach multiple management objectives 
Water quality programs, effective fishery management practices 
(by the PFMC), marine zoning: 
Pollution, invasive species, disease, destructive fishing practices 
(over fishing, trawling impacts to benthic environment), coastal 
development, aquaculture, etc. 
MPAs to address impacts to ecological interactions among 
biological populations, communities, and their habitat, and future 
impacts to the system 
Natural and anthropogenic impacts to ecosystem components of the 
MBNMS 
Impacts to ecosystem components in MBNMS
  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
    
Populations
 
Ecosystems
 
Communities
 
species diversity 
species number and size 
ecosystem productivity and stability 
MPAs as a tool for
  
benthic habitat quality (more complex and heterogeneous) 
community structure such as trophic structure in foodwebs 
larger fish produce many more young that are healthier and
 more likely to survive 
ecosystem-based management
  
serve as research areas to better distinguish between natural and
   anthropogenic perturbations to ecosystem components 
Research has shown that carefully crafted MPAs can be 
effective tools for maintaining and improving: 
ecosystem resiliency: ability to recover, resist and reverse natural and
 human disturbances 
    
       EFH or the RCAs
 -
Fishery-based MPAs 
 
EFH-RCA-MLPA
  
-Not adequately represented in existing MPAs, or 
Existing Protections
  
target single species - not ecological interactions
 of non target species and their habitat 
Existing spatial management measures in state and federal waters of the 
Sanctuary provide valuable protections from impacts in certain habitats, 
but habitats further offshore are either: 
- Not adequately protected by the gear based restrictions associated with
Existing MBNMS Zoning
  
• Certain human activities are specifically prohibited (shark 
chumming, low over-flights) 
• Certain human activities otherwise prohibited throughout the 
Sanctuary are allowed (motorized personal watercraft, harbor 
dredge disposal, jade collecting) 
Zones or MPAs are a not a new tool of spatial management for 
the MBNMS: 
•
•
  
  
components are maintained and/or restored
  
• Preservation of areas where natural ecosystem
  
Designation of research areas to differentiate 
between natural variation versus human impacts to 
ecological processes and components. 
MPAs in federal waters of the MBNMS
  
Preservation of unique and rare areas in their natural 
state for the benefit of future generations 
as an ecosystem-based tool to address
  
•
•
•
•
  
  
  
  
benefit of future generations 
Intrinsic or inherent value: areas of unique and 
exceptional natural qualities 
….unique and rare areas… ….for the
  
Examples may include deep-sea coral and sponge 
communities, chemosynthetic biological communities 
Proactively steward special places within the MBNMS 
The NMSA states that the NMSP will maintain for future 
generations the habitat, and ecological services, of the 
natural assemblages of living resources 
•
•
•
•
  
  
  
  
….areas where natural ecosystem
  
Intact ecosystem components are also more resilient to 
natural and anthropogenic impacts. 
Impacts of fishing on community and ecosystem structure 
still not well understood. 
Precautionary approach dictates setting aside a few areas 
where human activities are minimized to hedge against 
scientific and management uncertainty. 
Fishing activities have altered population abundances, and 
size and age structure of species, community composition, 
and habitat structure. 
components are maintained and/or restored
  
natural variation and human impacts ……
  
….research areas to differentiate between 
 
•Developing an understanding of the interactions of living marine 
resources is key to effective management. 
•While the new MPAs in state waters do afford the opportunity to 
distinguish human induced change from natural variation, 
offshore habitats are not adequately represented 
•Setting aside areas of the Sanctuary as MPAs can provide critical 
research opportunities in offshore habitats in order to distinguish 
natural variation from human induced impacts 
•
•
  
  
components are maintained and/or restored
  
• Preservation of areas where natural ecosystem
  
Designation of research areas to differentiate 
between natural variation versus human impacts to 
ecological processes and components. 
MPAs in federal waters of the MBNMS
  
Preservation of unique and rare areas in their natural 
state for the benefit of future generations 
as an ecosystem-based tool to address
  
The Decision - clarifications
  
•Was made after an evaluation of current management measures, 
including supplemental information provided to the MBNMS by the 
ACSF, at meeting MBNMS MPA objectives 
•Affects only the federal portions of the MBNMS, not any other west 
coast sanctuary 
•Included many hours of work by stakeholders, including scientists, on 
the MBNMS MPA working group 
•Does not automatically require a change to the Designation Document 
•Process is coordinated with our local partners at CDFG, PFMC, NMFS 
•Was not a comment on existing conservative management measures 
by the PFMC - recent stock assessments show improvements to some 
fishery stocks. 
•Does not mean the MBNMS wants to manage fisheries - the CDFG and 
PFMC/NMFS manage fisheries. 
•
•
•
  
  
  
 
Clarification of Purpose
  
Any future action would not be taken for the purpose of 
managing any single human activity or impact 
The primary purpose for this decision is the protection of 
biodiversity and ecosystem components of the Sanctuary 
The immediate action is to evaluate opportunities for 
enhancing or modifying existing PFMC MPAs, or creating 
additional MPAs to meet MMNMS goals. 
The Process Ahead
  
•Asking for input on “Concepts for a Process” and proposed 
timeline (see handouts) 
•Asking the PFMC and SAC for input on how best to build on 
the efforts of the MPA working group to ensure an effective 
and timely public process: 
– Attended the April PFMC meeting week of April 7, 2008 
– Coordinated with NOAA Fisheries in drafting the Rational 
for the MPA Decision 
2.
5. 
3. 
4. 
  
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
Process Concepts (1-5) 
The process ahead should capitalize on previous work 
Working group meetings should be professionally facilitated 
The membership of the MPA working group should remain 
approximately the same, some adjustment may be warranted 
Working group and science panel meetings should be public and any 
products made publicly available 
Science members should remain involved but serve as subject matter 
experts, not as stakeholders. A separate but public science panel 
should be convened to evaluate eventual proposals - include PFMC 
SSC members as part of science panel 
7. 
9. 
8. 
6. 
 
 
 
 
 
There is a need for socioeconomic study 
Process Concepts (6-11+)
  
11. Decisions on implementing authority will be made in the future 
A starting point for discussions should be the Areas of Interest 
identified by the working group adjacent to MPAs in state waters 
Adjacent State and Federal  waters MPAs should generally have 
parallel regulations 
10. The working group will have approx. 6 meetings over 6 months to 
develop proposals to forward to the SAC. 
The MPA planning process should provide for dialogue with and input 
from PFMC (prior to the NEPA phase and frequently) 
12. Include a thorough characterization of existing protective measures as 
the status quo alternative and include the Davidson Seamount as part 
of the Sanctuary when developing the alternatives 
•
•
•
  
  
 
 
Vast portions (>98%)  of the MBNMS facilitate commercial and 
recreational extraction. Less than 2% is off limits to all forms of 
fishing in nearshore marine reserves implemented by the state. 
“to facilitate to the extent compatible with the primary objective of 
resource protection, all public and private uses of the resources of 
these marine areas not prohibited pursuant to other authorities.” 
(Section 301(b)(6)) 
 This provision of the NMSA indicates that in the interest of 
facilitating public and private uses of sanctuary resources, resource 
protection is the primary objective and therefore takes precedence. 
Human uses and/or activities should be facilitated only where 
practicable in the context of resource protection. 
Use and protection of marine resource 
