New York State Department of Labor Technology Projects  
   
  
Alchemy Calais Open Source Natural Language Processing 
 
A proof of concept (PoC) was completed using open-source natural language processing technology to 
parse resumes, job opening descriptions (OSOS database), and training opportunity descriptions (ETP 
database)  and match, based on tagged metadata, an individual’s resume with potential job and training 
opportunities. 
 
This PoC proved to be successful with approximately 70-80% accuracy on matching. We believe by 
cleaning the data we query against in our databases, and exploring alternative data repositories (using 
information from web sites like Monster.com for job listings and exploring additional training providers), 
we can get the accuracy percentage much higher. We’d also like to increase the robustness of the 
application by adding mapping/geo-coding technology to allow for searching within a specified geographic 
area. (For example, available opportunities within 20 miles of a specified zip code). 
 
Current Status Report:   8/20/2010 Continued analysis of data sources to provide the most relevant 
search results for training and job opportunities began. Both Alchemy & Calais open-source natural 
language processing tools have been utilized at this point. Currently, our data sources to run against 
these tools have been our own job listing and training provider databases. Currently, we are exploring an 
external site to see if they offer a service that would allow us to search a broader list of job listings. Geo-
mapping technology is being explored to provide search results for training or employment opportunities 
within a specific (e.g. 10, 25 or 50) mile radius from a specified zip code.   
 
 
Apprenticeship Training Program Database  
   
The Apprenticeship Training Program currently has 2 separate Microsoft Access databases and paper 
files to manage the Apprenticeship Training Programs and Apprentices.  This project would create one all 
inclusive secure, web-based, user-friendly, transactional, tracking and monitoring database. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 (Agile Development) 
 
Sprint Name: Sprint 1: Applicant Management: Timeline (8 weeks) Started: 7/26/2010, Planned End Date: 
9/17/2010, Timeline Status: On Schedule 
 
Sprint 1 Overview: Applicant Management 
 
Update the Product Backlog 
 
Complete Detail Business Requirements (Business Process Model, Use Cases, GUI 
Specification, Data Specification, Business Rules),  
 
Complete Detail Technical Requirements (Architecture Overview Diagram, System Domain 
Model, Service Model, User Role Management Requirements),  
 
Complete Design (GUI, Data, Application Services, Database Tables, Trade Database Table(s)) 
and Development (GUI, Applicant Management Tables. Trade Database Table(s)). 
 
Status Summary 
 
Product Backlog:  The Lead BA started his QA review of the updated backlog. The project team 
performed a QA review of the backlog on Friday, 8/20. Updates are being finalized and the 
Customer should receive the updated version next week. 
 
Detail Business Requirements: Use Cases, Requirements Specifications and Business Rules are 
in draft development.  
 
First drafts of the Add Applicant is complete, however there is an open architecture question 
pertaining to Add Applicant regarding how to handle Employer profile services from Labor Online. 
Additional analysis is required 
 
The Edit Applicant, Search Applicant and Delete Applicant Use Cases are near completion and 
will be forwarded tomorrow to the Lead BA to begin the review. Team deliverable walkthrough's 
on the Use Cases should begin late next week or early the following week. 
 
Development of the screen flow diagram is in process and being done in parallel to the Use Case 
review. 
 
The first draft of the Trade Data dictionary was completed and the detail requirements and 
specifications are in progress. 
 
The GUI Specifications are in progress. The Search Page is complete. The Add Applicant, Add 
Contact and Modify Contact will be completed this week.  
 
Detail Technical Requirements:  
 
Analyzing technical requirements to Design and Implement Trade Database Tables is 20% 
complete. 
 
Domain and Service Model design for ATP Applicant Management is 20% complete. 
 
Design of the High Level Architecture Overview diagram is 10% complete. 
 
Development:  Development of the GUI template (Fonts, Menus, color palette, tabs, etc, per DOL 
standards) is in progress. A team review is scheduled for Monday. 
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week: 
 
First drafts of all Use Cases will all be completed.  
 
Lead BA review of the Product Backlog will be completed.  
 
Development of the first draft of the GUI template will be completed. 
 
The Trade data dictionary was completed.  
 
Project Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:  None to repor 
 
 
Asset Center Upgrade  
   
This project is proposed to enhance the Department of Labor’s Asset Management system in order to 
gain new functionality that will better meet users’ requirements and to obtain previously included 
functionality that was lost in an earlier upgrade. There are additional reasons to enhance the Asset 
Management system: the inventory system has never achieved its promised efficiencies; redundant data 
entry wastes valuable Department of Labor resources; the current system does not allow for edits to a 
request once submitted; there is no standardized description field, making it impossible to sort and track 
by item description; and the asset catalog needs to be updated and made more extensive. 
  
Current Status Report:  05/25/10 Responses were received from the Bid.  They are being scored and 
will then be returned to Purchase for review. 
 
 
Building 12 Server Room Upgrade  
 
The New York State Department of Labor Technical Services group (NYSDOL TS) is working with the 
New York State Department of Labor Property Office (NYSDOL PO) to determine whether to keep the 
Building 12 server room in Basement Room #4 (BD-4) or move to Basement Room #6 (BD-6, Northwest 
corner of the building).  Basement Room 15 was an option but was removed from consideration when 
NYSDOL PO informed the team that there is periodic water damage in the room. 
 
The goal is to refresh the physical plant resources supporting the development computing environment.  It 
is necessary to provide a more robust and secure site that allows flexibility for future growth.   Once this is 
in place the project can be closed out.  Thereafter work will be tracked in the Keep projects within 
Technical Services. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 First phase of project is marked as complete. OGS has accepted the 
project and assigned the engineer. DOL property has received first cut of estimate and is reviewing  
 
 
Change Management for IT Service Management (ITSM)  
   
This project was created to develop and implement a Change Management ITSM process which will 
ensure that standardized methods and procedures are used for efficient and prompt handling of all 
changes.  
  
Current Status Report:  06/24/2010 WE met with the Release Management Team to gather their 
requirements for Change Management workflow.  The team will need to meet again once the project 
resource returns from vacation. 
  
Project is further delayed because we are unable to migrate to the needed version of Footprints.  While 
Footprints can run on the server and operating system levels in the environment, it cannot be deployed 
using the current and probably unsupported SQLServer 2000 environment.  We cannot go forward with 
any Footprints deployments until the Database Administration team can create a SQLServer 2008 
environment for us. 
   
Workflows and their status: 
Workflow 
Status 
WSRR 
EPAS added additional requirements to their workflow, and additional 
data items. 
Project Request 
Received list of authorized requestor list from BACS; configuring 
workflows.  Advised that the workflow is changing for UI requests; 
sent current workflow to Eric Goldberg and Pat LaPlante for their 
requirements changes. 
Database 
Met with Database representatives to document their workflow 
Deployments/Release 
Management 
Met with architects to discuss their requirements 
LDAP requests 
Part of new User maintenance project 
User Maintenance 
Skeleton built in user maintenance/IRR project for security reasons. 
VPN requests 
Need to create Visio diagram for the various type of VPN requested 
 
 
 
 
Contact Center Implementation  
   
The New York State Department of Labor (NYSDOL) is a leader in providing integrated customer service 
to jobseekers, workers and employers in the highly competitive workforce of the 21st century.  The 
Department fulfills its mission through a wide variety of activities that revolve around the needs of 
employers and workers.   
 
The Department: 
 
Administers the Unemployment Insurance Program, which provides temporary financial support 
for those who have lost their jobs through no fault of their own.  
 
Provides employment-related information and job search assistance services.  
 
Provides training programs and retraining programs for workers displaced by technology change 
or foreign competition.  
 
Enforces regulations designed to minimize hazards in the workplace.  
 
Works with the private sector to create job opportunities for the labor force and to meet employer 
needs for qualified workers.  
 
Enforces the State Labor Law to prevent the exploitation of workers, including minors and 
immigrant workers.  
 
Protects the safety of the public on ski tows, amusement rides and in places of public assembly.  
 
Regulates the handling of asbestos to protect both workers and the general public.  
 
Provide accurate and timely data on present and future economic trends affecting the people of 
the state.  
 
Works as a cooperating agency in the Federal/State labor market information statistical 
programs. 
  
Much of the information regarding the above services and regulations is not easily accessible to New 
Yorkers.  To facilitate the provision of services and enforcement of regulations, the Department has 
initiated an effort to create a centralized customer Contact Center.  The purpose of the new Contact 
Center is to communicate information regarding program opportunities, instructions concerning NYSDOL 
regulations, and general statistical information with regard to Department programs.  
 
The communication channels that will be administered are: 
 
Telephone  
 
Email  
 
Web Chat  
 
Online Ticketing 
  
Current Status Report: 8/20/2010 Customer update meeting was conducted by status report and scrum. 
 
Staffing: The Training department continues to work on their strategic approach for the training 
curriculum and for the learning environment approach.  Approvals for staffing are still with Civil 
Service.   
 
Facilities: The room availability is still estimated at the end of August.   
 
Equipment: We know that we will need headphones but not telephones.  We may need chairs, 
supplies, and other start up items.  We will review the hardware.  We know we will have to scrub 
the current computers and re-image them to the Contact Center requirements.   
 
Telephony: The budget requests have been submitted and are awaiting processing.  The work for 
setting up the call management process will commence following the analysis completion on 
9/15.   
 
Software: this remains the same from last week due to vacations with the business analyst.   
 
Analysis: Interviews for the analysis continue.  Target date for the completion of the analysis is 
September 15th.  
 
 
COOP Emergency Notification System  
 
The Continuity of Operations Plans (COOP) for the Department of Labor and its Divisions require an 
emergency notification system that will allow the Department to promptly contact affected employees 
during or outside of work hours in the event of an emergency which may impact on their job location. The 
COOPs also require rosters of employees on emergency management teams with updated contact 
information. 
 
The Department currently does not have employee home contact information available electronically.   
 
The Department plans to utilize NY-Alert system for emergency notification to its employees.  NY- Alert is 
operated by the NYS Emergency Management Office (SEMO) at no cost to NYS agencies.  Under NY-
Alert, DOL personnel authorized by management will have the capability to send emergency messages to 
employees which will be sent immediately and simultaneously to employees at each mode of contact that 
employees have provided. An MOU between DOL and SEMO is in process.  
 
This project will set up a process internally to collect the information and process any updates.  This 
information can then be provided electronically to NY-Alert for integration into that system. The employee 
data will only be utilized for sending emergency messages by DOL management and NY-Alert when that 
system is operative. 
  
Current Status Report:  8/26/10 We sent a follow-up email to the vendor to see when the data will be 
loaded from the spreadsheet that we sent. They are validating the data and will let us know when they 
plan to load it into the application.  The order form for NY-Alert is being reviewed and we will follow up 
with Counsel's office for final sign off.    Instructions are being written up for the staff who will be notifiers 
in NY-Alert.  Two test groups have been set up in NY-Alert and emergency management staff are 
familiarizing themselves with the system.  A status meeting was held with the customer.   
 
 
Customer Verification Service with Department of Motor Vehicles  
   
Currently the Department of Labor (DOL) has an Oracle database stored procedures solution to query the 
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) when claimants apply for Unemployment Insurance benefits.  The 
current solution was architected in 1997 when the DOL opened the Telephone Claim Centers.  The 
solution is running on old technology (hardware and software) and we have experienced several 
infrastructure failures at the DMV data center over the last 6 months.  These failures have caused 
disruption to the DOL UI Claims taking operations.  DOL and DMV would like to refactor the current 
solution to a web-services solution that can be reused with multiple applications and customers who may 
need to consume/share this service.  DOL specifically is interested in modernizing the solution to improve 
the performance and reliability of the technical interface to the DMV information thus improving the 
workflow and processing of UI Claims that require DMV information for customer identity verification. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 The MOU is in the mail.  It needs to be sent to DMV and then back to 
DOL with the correct signatures.  The staging environment is having a firewall issue.  A request was 
made to OFT to open the port on the firewall.  
 
 
Data Sharing Assessment Project  
   
The purpose of this project is to develop an analysis report for data sharing with other New York State 
governmental entities, and to implement data sharing beginning with the New York State Insurance Fund.  
The New York State Department of Labor (NYSDOL) is responsible for a variety of programs, including 
Worker Protection, Unemployment Insurance, Employment Services, and Workforce Development.  
Information from these programs is collected and maintained by various divisions in the department.  
Many other governmental entities may find this information useful in that it could serve to decrease costs 
and improve service by simplifying their operations and improving data quality.  NYSDOL information may 
assist other governmental entities to verify the existence, location and status of employers, employees 
and other program participants.   This information could be used to facilitate eligibility determination for 
various other New York State programs, licenses and permits. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 There has been little progress on MOU. DOL counsel office has sent 
query on use of Data. NYSIF have to respond back. Counsel office is still waiting to hear the use of data. 
Counsel's office suggested that the technical team should not start sharing the data unless the MOU is 
signed. Team is working on getting a MOU in place between NYSIF and DOL.  
 
 
Data Warehouse: Federal Reporting  
   
The Data Warehouse Federal Reporting project will ensure that the Unemployment Insurance Federal 
reports, the Employment & Training Administration (ETA) Series, are produced from the Data Warehouse 
instead of being produced from multiple data sources.  It will also ensure that the reports are accurate 
since the report data items will be calculated using the single source of data.  
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 This week, activities focused on Employment and Training 
Administration (ETA) Federal report ETA 5159. We have completed the coding of the work share report 
segment and have updated EUC report segment with the new employer numbers. Next week we expect 
to publish new report values for validation and to complete the business requirements for the work share 
report segment. 
 
 
Disaster Recovery  
   
There currently is no implemented Disaster Recovery (DR) plan or environment in place at New York 
State Department of Labor (NYSDOL).  A DR plan has been created in December of 2008 for the 
purposes of implementation but has not been executed.  Audits have been performed that have found 
NYSDOL to be non-compliant with ensuring the appropriate back up of existing servers and applications. 
 
There are two paths being followed on this project in parallel: 
 
NYSDOL is working with the New York State Department of Labor Property Office (NYSDOL PO) to 
determine the cost and terms associated with placing the DR site in the Glendale building #7 facility 
located outside of Binghamton, NY.   
One of the IBM Power6 595s purchased through the UNIX project will be used for the 
Development/Testing/DR environment in BD-4.  It will initially be set up to prototype what the DR 
environment will look like.  A decision will be made later in the process to see if the configured P6 595 will 
be moved down to Glendale or if a new server will be purchased. 
The goal is to set up the DR facility with the appropriate network, HVAC, Power, Data Circuits and 
Network Security Devices; as well as procure the hardware (Servers, Voice Cards, PBX) to ensure the 
continued operation of the UI Benefits Claims, SOA, and select Legacy systems.  The project will be 
closed once these are in place.  Thereafter work will be tracked in the Keep projects within Technical 
Services. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 A project Review was held for this project and it was decided that this 
project will be put on hold until Technical Services is able to hire someone who has done disaster 
recovery implementations.  This resource will become the project manager.  The PTP is at OFT.  Work 
will not wait until OFT DR site is identified and available.  It will resume upon hiring of the technical expert.  
 
 
Document and Correspondence Management  
 
For a very long time, DOL’s business has been very paper and image-based. As time progresses and we 
move towards communicating with our customer via multiple channels (web, email, snail mail/paper) the 
need to identify a solution for management of a complex document/correspondence environment 
becomes very important. 
 
Document and Correspondence Management is a project to identify all the different types of content that 
DOL uses today (many produced from disparate products/sources). Additionally, we need to categorize 
all content. These content categories would be would be: mass-printed letters (1-way communication to 
DOL customer); one-off letters (printed one at a time; 1-way communication); forms (applications for 
certain licenses or programs that we need to present both electronically & in paper formats; 1-way 
communication from a customer to DOL); questionnaires (questionnaires sent to employers & claimants 
during the adjudication process; 2-way communication between DOL and a customer). 
 
One way communication to a DOL customer (one-off or mass printed) should use our existing xPression 
solution, and the standards around how to do this must be adhered to. The overall 
Document/Correspondence Standards will be part of this project. (although there are currently existing 
usage documentation for xPression, which should be used and will be incorporated into this standard 
when it is produced for this project) 
 
For 2-way communication between DOL & a customer (forms & questionnaires), the solution will be 
identified and implemented as part of this project. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/13/10 The project team and the EPAS functional manager met on 8/9 to 
discuss project requirements and scope.  The lead analyst produced a list of requirements pulled from a 
UISIM document.  They were reviewed in an 8/12 meeting and the team chose the ones that were 
applicable to the project.  
  
 
EA Foundational Services  
   
In a Service Oriented Architecture (SOA), small computer programs called services are orchestrated into 
composite applications that provide many different functions to end users. These services can be 
categorized many ways and provide many different types of capabilities. At Labor we often look at our 
services in four basic layers.  The first layer is Foundational Services, which deals with things like 
workflow, error-message-handling, logging, routing, caching, and notifications.  It is expected that New 
York State’s SOA based modernization effort will be greatly accelerated so it is now essential that the 
foundational services be completed based on industry and Labor specific standards, best practices and 
patterns. 
 
Four foundational services in particular will be addressed.   Workflow, GUI Framework, Correspondence 
Management and Document Management will be the focus of this project, based on their criticality and 
the amount of work remaining to complete them.  
 
Tasks involved in this project would include: 
 
Final design for each foundational service. The primary high level design documents have been 
completed. The first goal of the project team will be to complete deeper level design so that the 
development sprints may be initiated. This may require additional requirements gathering from 
the CAD teams that will be consuming these services 
 
Develop each foundational service. Development will be carried out in an agile, iterative fashion. 
Sufficient design will have been conducted to develop each service, and the CAD teams will have 
the opportunity to review deliverables regularly, and requirements and design will be adjusted as 
needed. 
 
Testing of each foundational service. Testing at the end of each delivery cycle will ensure that the 
development teams are meeting the requirements of the Composite Application Development 
(CAD) teams. Testing will include unit testing, to demonstrate that each module produces the 
expected outputs. Integrated tests will make certain that each service behaves as expected when 
interacting with all pieces of a composite application. Finally, performance testing will assess the 
service’s capacity to perform at acceptable levels under the duress of high levels of concurrent 
transactions.  
 
Deployment. Once the testing of each foundational service is complete, the service will be 
promoted to the Production environment. 
  
Current Status Report:   8/20/10 The Customer meeting was conducted this week. Workflow Deliverable 
- the Trust Association Interceptor (TAI) license has passed from Finance and has gone to the vendor.  
Final testing in the DEV environment should be completed next week. 
 
 
ECM for Worker's Comp  
   
This project will take existing documentation that is currently maintained in hard copy and store it 
electronically within the ECM repository.   Users will be given the means to import new data as it arrives.  
Users will use a web interface to access stored data.  Initial use will be limited to the personnel unit but 
moving forward access could be afforded to authorized users for access to predefined  views; a claimant 
to view their case file, for instance.   Additionally, this project will look to utilize the workflow capabilities of 
ECM in an attempt to streamline the Workers Compensation process.   
 
The implementation of this project will provide increased security of sensitive personnel documentation as 
data will now be password protected.  Access will be limited to specific users with predefined rights.  In 
addition, there is an expectation of improvement in both accuracy and expediency as the risk for human 
error is greatly reduced.  Electronic files are far less susceptible to loss, damage or misplacement then 
the current hard copy system.  ECM can alert users when a document has lingered longer than what is 
considered acceptable thereby greatly reducing the chances for accidental oversights.  Finally, 
implementation will significantly limit the amount of paper required to accommodate the unit’s tasks.  
Effectively reducing paper, printer and toner costs as electronic versions of documentation are available 
for use and reuse. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/13/2010 (COTS Package Install and Configuration) 
 
Sprint Name: Sprint 1 - Design, Timeline Status: Behind Schedule (Ahead of Schedule, On Schedule, 
Behind Schedule, Blocked, On-Hold)  
 
Sprint 1 Overview: Define Item types and ACL's 
 
Deliverable Status: 
 
Status Summary: We have discovered that the looks ups we deem necessary to make the product useful 
to the user are not supported by the front end (webi) that has been provided.  We have to gather more 
information at this point both from IBM and our own research to determine whether our assumptions of 
the front end are incorrect or if not do we need to expand the project and create our own front end - which 
would require additional resources. 
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week: Discovered that while we can connect to the necessary tables and 
the API's exist to retrieve this data the supplied front end does not seem capable to receive the data. 
 
Project Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate: None to Report 
 
 
Eligible Training Provider List Rewrite  
   
The New York State Eligible Training Provider List (NYS-ETPL) was established in compliance with Title 
1, Section 122 of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) of 1998. The purpose of the ETPL is to re-write the 
existing application to present a broad and diverse selection of training choices to support employment 
goals of individuals. 
 
The following revisions, upgrades and additions to the current ETPL website must be made: 
 
The site needs to be given the ability to rapidly identify and categorize priority training offerings at 
the State, Regional and Local levels.  The method for doing this should also identify the sector 
the training relates to and identify which are considered “Priority Sectors” at the State, Regional 
and Local levels.  
 
The current search function does not produce complete/correct results and must be updated and 
corrected.  
 
An upgrade in the ability to report on performance information is necessary.  
 
Connectivity between the site and the One Stop Operating System (OSOS) needs to be 
established.  
 
A crosswalk created between the Classification of Instructional Program (CIP) codes with SOC 
codes should be created.  
 
The site needs to provide NYSDOL Administrative Access. 
 
Current Status Report:   08/20/10 (Agile Development Project)  
 
Project Status:  The goal of the project is to sunset the existing ETP online application, that was created 
in ASP with a SQL server backend, and replace it with an updated web based application with an Oracle 
backend.  The new application can be broken down into 4 modules; Training Provider (TP), Workforce 
Investment Board Administration (WIB A), NYS DOL Admin (NYS DOL A), and Job Seeker Search (JS).   
 
The following overview details the progression through the sprints with anticipated timeframes: 
 
Training Provider Sprints - 4 months (August 2009 through December 2009 - Done) 
 
WIB Admin Sprints - 4 months (January 2010 through May 2010 - In Progress*) 
 
NYS DOL Admin Sprints - 2 months (May 2010 through June 2010) 
 
Job Seeker Sprint - 1 month (July 2010) 
 
Production/Go-Live (August/September 2010) 
 
*The WIB Admin sprint was pushed out by a month.  Sprint 4 accounted for the New Provider 
Registration, New Offerings, Manage Local List, and Critical Changes services.  Sprint 5 will account for 
the Notification, Outside Offerings, Comment History, and WIB Work Queue for Pending Edits Approvals.  
Sprint 6 will account for the Subsequent Eligibility work. 
 
 
Sprint Name: Data Migration; Timeline (4 weeks), Started: 8/16/2010, Planned End Date: 9/10/10, 
Timeline Status: On Schedule, (Ahead of Schedule, On Schedule, Behind Schedule, Blocked, On-Hold)  
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week: 
 
Completed changes to Contact service. 
 
Completed changes of adding Course type field on Course details page. 
 
Completed set up for Application Logging. 
 
Work in Progress on Data migration. 
 
Testing and bug fixes. 
 
Scrum sessions daily. 
 
Conducted Customer Representative status meeting. 
 
Project impediments impacting progress and actions to mitigate:  1. We need OFT LDAP web service 
URL to associate Role to Training provider users. 
 
  
Emergency Unemployment Compensation Expansion  
   
The project will plan for and implement the expansion of Emergency Unemployment Compensation 
(EUC), the implementation of Extended Benefits (EB), and the implementation of Federal Additional 
Compensation (FAC - $25 weekly UI supplement).  
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 Changes for the cutoff of Tier IV eligibility were tested and 
implemented Thursday night.   Changes were also installed to allow Shared Work EUC payments to 
continue.  Our weekly meeting with UID was held on Thursday.  
 
 
Enterprise Release Management  
   
The Enterprise Release Management Project will encompasses the current Change Management 
environment which consists of Rational Clear Case and Clear Quest, new SOA application/services build 
and release disciplines and SOA application/services deployment preparation. 
 
The current Rational environment needs to be modified in order to align with an enterprise build and 
release strategy. The build and release strategy will consist of creating a set of best practices using 
various tools to create an automated build and release process for all the current environment’s 
Information Technology projects to use. This needs to be done because of the many SOA projects going 
on at one time. This creates a need to organize the build and release disciplines, rather than have 10 -15 
or more SOA projects performing their own build and releases, which is causing wasted time and 
confusion among all projects.   
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 Team completed development of ClearCase process document. 
Rational team reviewed document second time for the changes it suggested. Team also met with build 
team to explain the project objective.  
 
 
Federal Tax Offset  
   
This project will provide the means for the State of New York to collect benefit overpayments through 
participation in the Treasury Offset Program (TOP).  Participation in TOP is expected to assist in 
collecting over $169 million in benefit overpayments from 134,600 open benefit collection cases.  
Leverage the existing Statewide Offset Program (SWOP) coding and process to the greatest degree 
possible. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 Program Management 
 
Project Schedule: Start Date: 4/23/2010   Planned End Date: 12/24/2010  Timeline Status: On Schedule 
 
Project Description:  Develop a data warehouse extract as the source data for sending claimant records 
to a mailing vendor to print UC TOP Claimant letters, mail UC TOP letters to Claimants, establish 
agreements with and develop initial data file and update process with the US Treasury, build back-end 
tracking and update process at NYS DOL. 
 
Status Summary: Envelopes for the Claimant mailings were received and samples were forwarded to the 
vendor for alignment set up and testing. UID resources are resetting the type 6 records in legacy so they 
will be picked up and refreshed in the data warehouse. UID intends to complete the reset by close-of-
business on Wednesday to enable the data to be picked up on the extract for the warehouse. The final 
warehouse extract run is planned for Friday August 27th; one business day earlier than planned to allow 
for reruns if required.  A meeting was held between Legacy, Database and the UI Customer to discuss a 
proposed solution for establishing the TOP flag in the legacy system. The suggested approach is being 
implemented and a test file was generated and forwarded to the legacy technical resource. The customer 
status meeting was held. 
 
Sprint Accomplishments This Week:  
 
Claimant envelops were received and a sample was forwarded to the vendor. 
 
Consensus was reached on the mainframe flag setting approach. Changes to the system were 
started. 
 
UID started the reset of the type 6 records.  
 
Project Impediments Impacting Progress and/or Risks to Mitigate:  None to report. 
 
  
Forms Review and Revision  
   
All computer generated forms will be reviewed and revised to the extent possible to eliminate the 
possibility of information security breaches.   
 
The unnecessary printing of PPSI (personal, private and sensitive information) on the forms will be 
eliminated.  Particular attention will be given to PPSI on duplexed and multi-page forms.  Where use of 
the social security number cannot be eliminated, consideration will be given to using only the last four 
digits.  
  
Current Status Report: 08/20/10 No activity - still awaiting UID's review of the sample of LO 443's 
mailed for one day.    
 
 
HR Personnel-LATS  
   
The HR Personnel-LATS project is an effort to reengineer, develop and implement a modern Human 
Resource/Personnel and Time and Attendance system for the NYS Department of Labor.  The new 
system will function as a single integrated Human Resource Management (HRM) system (Personnel, 
Time and Attendance).  It will interface directly with systems at the various control agencies so that 
centralized data entry can be avoided.  The new system will provide a user interface that is easy to use 
and understand.  It will offer built in capability for user defined ad hoc reports to enhance the 
management capabilities offered by the system.  The new system will be well established and tested by 
other agencies.  The current HR systems in use today are mainframe based systems that have been 
expanded and enhanced many times over the years to address functionality issues as well as 
requirements placed on us by the NYS Office of the State Comptroller, NYS Department of Civil Service, 
and the NYS Division of the Budget. As a result of this steady stream of enhancements and new 
requirements, these systems are in need of an overhaul.  The resulting system should meet all the needs 
of the control agencies as well as provide the NYS Department of Labor with a more cohesive and user 
friendly system for the staff in the Administrative Finance Bureau and Human Resources, as well as the 
employees throughout the agency that use these systems routinely.    
 
The first phase of this project is to do data gathering regarding the current HRM systems.  The NYS 
Department of Labor is identifying the connection points between its legacy HRM systems and other 
applications.  A description of the data that is sent into the HRM system and what is retrieved is being 
documented to be used to complete the Fit-Gap with an inter-agency hosted "commercial off the shelf" 
solution.  
Current Status Report:   08/20/2010 Interfaces -   The unexpected results of our interface testing were 
sent to the vendor.  The vendor requested copies of the files that were generated by the web services.  
The files from both tests were sent.  The developer continues to make changes to programs that use 
leave codes so that they will work properly when we switch to the new application.  An inquiry was made 
about a couple of reports to see if they are still being used.  A (mainframe) software install to allow us to 
utilize a more secure file transfer process is scheduled for 8/20.  Technical Services will notify us when 
we can begin testing, hopefully the first week of September. 
Customer Testing - Completed a review of the interface testing, compiled and sent information to the 
vendor about the unexpected results.     
A status meeting was not held, but a written update was sent to the group.  The heads of HR and the 
Administrative Finance Bureau were sent a copy of the status report. 
 
Identity Management 
 
New York State Department of Labor (NYSDOL) will develop standardized identity management services.  
The design, development and implementation of these services and service strategy will take into account 
the various hardware platforms and software systems currently in use at NYSDOL.  The services will 
provide a single point of reference for collection of the user identification information (initial registration), 
assignment of access keys (ID, password), user roles and access authorization.  The services will be 
designed for use by all NYSDOL users, both internal and external.  We will partner with the Office for 
Technology (OFT) and other state agencies to implement the solution in such a way that it may be 
extended and reused by all New York State agencies. This enterprise approach will improve the user 
experience, improve information security, and increase the effectiveness and efficiency of both person 
and systems resource utilization. 
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 The Customer weekly meeting was conducted. 
 
Internal Workers: The development work continues.  The timing is being extended for development due to 
unforseen complexities.  
 
Common Authentication for Employers: Regression testing is being completed.  Implementation planning 
continues.  Training and procedure development is underway.  Current test code was elevated to the 
production environment on August 17th.   
 
Statewide Effort: A proposal continues for approving Labor's process of authenticating a claimant for 
benefits as a trust level 2 authentication processes is being drafted. This will first need to be approved by 
UID and Office of Counsel before being submitted to the Statewide IdM Governance Board.   
 
External work force:  Work on the architectural recommendation is underway and should be completed 
next week.  This will be presented in the Senior Management Meeting for review and discussion.     
 
 
Implement Integrated AIX TWS with zOS TWS  
   
Implement an integrated Tivoli Workload Scheduling (TWS) system that will allow DOL to manage and 
coordinate open system server based batch jobs from a centralized location.  As data is migrated from 
mainframe based solutions (software and data structures) to server (AIX, MS Windows and other) based 
solutions, it is increasingly import to manage the coordination of batch executed server processes (batch 
jobs) in a coordinated fashion.  It is also important that we be able to setup and execute a sequence of 
defined processes with both regular (daily, weekly, monthly) and irregular frequency (on demand) and 
also to stop the execution of processes in the event of batch failures and to send error notification for 
immediate action and/or result reporting and automated notifications . These features of batch scheduling 
and management are well established on the z/OS TWS system and we need to implement a similar 
scheduler for open systems based processes.  A proposed solution would be one that leveraged the z/OS 
TWS system to manage the sequencing and coordination of the server jobs (since we already have an 
established Production Control environment and relationship with OFT for support).  To do this we believe 
we need an AIX based TWS node implemented to integrate the z/OS TWS environment. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 Requirements gathering is underway. A consolidated list of current 
batch processes is being created. Team sent the requirement for purchase of the tool to tech services.   
 
 
Information Classification Implementation 
An Information Classification effort will establish levels of classification for all information assets within the 
New York State Department of Labor and orderly and systematically assign each asset to an appropriate 
level of security control. 
  
Pursuant to the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA), New York State Department of 
Labor must comply with Information Classification requirements as specified by Federal Information 
Processing Standards (FIPS) publication 199.  
  
Current Status Report:  8/20/10 Database staff continue performing data discovery operations. The 
process of data discovery allows the classification tools to read the metadata of available data sources. 
To that metadata we will add fields for classification.    
 
 
InfoSphere Implementation  
   
In order to help speed the analysis, cleansing and movement of data from legacy systems to modernized 
systems, we purchased the InfoSphere Suite of Tools.  In order to realize the functionality available in this 
set of tools, we need to create a strategy for the implementation and continuous use of these products. 
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 Some space issues have come up within the product and the team is 
investigating why this is happening.  At the moment, the address normalization service is not deployed 
and is a block for another project trying to integrate it into one of our legacy applications.  The team will 
continue to work to resolve these issues and does not foresee a detrimental block for any one team.     
 
 
Job Zone OSOS Connectivity  
  
Job Zone OSOS Connectivity is a project intended to create a data bridge between the two applications 
which will allow real time or near real time data sharing. Customers registered in OSOS would have 
accounts created in Job Zone and New York State customers creating Job Zone accounts would be 
registered in OSOS.  The data common to both systems would move between them.  When customers 
complete certain activities in Job Zone those activities would be automatically recorded in OSOS.   
 
This project is needed to address the growing number of customers seeking services from the One-Stop 
system at a time when resources available to provide those services are shrinking.  The services currently 
available through Job Zone are not coordinated with services that are available or provided through the 
One-Stop System resulting in duplicate effort both on the part of the customer and One-Stop staffs. 
    
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 NaviSite sent scoping questions. Staff met with DEWS to develop 
responses.  
 
 
Licensing (formerly DOSH Occupational Certificates)  
 
Recent legislation signed by Governor Paterson mandates that the NYS Department of Labor (DOL), 
Division of Safety and Health (DOSH) begin certifying pyrotechnicians, effective October, 2009.   DOSH 
would like to use this opportunity to not only create a system to meet their immediate needs of issuing 
pyrotechnician certificates, but to replace their current paper, mainframe, and Access database systems 
used for processing similar types of occupational certificates (crane operators, blasters, and laser 
operators) as well.  The system will allow license candidates to submit certificate applications and 
supplemental documentation, pay application fees, and check the status of their applications, all on-line.  
An internal component would allow DOSH staff to complete these same tasks plus additional case 
management tasks of  viewing, processing, and approving applications, scheduling competency exams, 
generating correspondence, running reports, recording inspection data, and recording the outcome of 
appeals.  Finally, the system will produce a data file to be sent to the Department of Motor Vehicles 
(DMV) to support the printing and mailing of photo certificate identification cards.  The scope of this 
project was increased to include all licenses, certificates and permits issued by the NYS DOL and provide 
a full eCommerce solution designed to be easily utilized by other licensing entities.  
 
Short Term Solution: End users are entering application data in the system via the MS Access DB.  
Production files are being sent to the NYS DMV to generate the IDs. 
 
Long Term Solution: Focus is being revised to account for all licensing applications within the agency.  
The services and documentation created will be made available to other agencies for potential 
consumption.   
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010  
 
Project Status: The team is focusing on consumable user interfaces for the numerous licenses, 
certifications and permits that are issued by DOL.  We are also working toward optimizing the business 
processes to accommodate the various requirements each of these have.  It is intended that the 
framework and documentation created will have the potential to be consumed by other agencies. 
 
Weekly Customer Meeting: Met with customer representatives on 8/19/2010 to update them on the status 
of the project and progress made since the previous weekly meeting.  
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week: 
 
Daily scrum sessions. 
 
Continued analyzing the framework for the larger licenses within NYS DOL. 
 
Functional team continued to meet with users to review /revise business process models and 
spent time observing the business process for specific license types. 
 
Functional team continued to work on staff process model. 
 
Functional team continued the identification of business process optimization points. 
 
Development team continued adding functionality to components of the user interface. 
 
Development team focused on changes from business analyst and customer review of screens. 
 
Developers continued work on screen look and feel. 
 
Development team looked into a validation approach, met with other development team and 
EPAS to discuss a specific approach. 
 
Team worked on backlog items. 
 
Continued meetings to determine areas for business process optimization. 
 
Remaining sprints for the Pyrotechnics project will include: 
 
Sprint 7 - Continue work on GUI, Continue Business Process Optimization effort, Service 
Candidate identification.  
 
Sprint 8 - TBD 
 
Sprint 9 - TBD 
 
Sprint 10 - TBD 
  
 
Notification Service in WAS  
   
The Notification Service would be a generic utility service deployed within our WAS (Websphere 
Application Server) environment that would be consumable by all other services, and Websphere Process 
Server and Message Broker. This service will allow for a consumer to pass an XML message to the 
Notification Service to request an email notification be sent out to an individual or a group. 
 
Current Status Report:  Effective on or before 10/9/09, the WAS (WebSphere Application Server) 
Notification service was deployed and is now functional in the development environment. Now all 
consumers of the existing Message Broker service need to test their processes to assure the new 
notification service is functioning as expected. This will be a good demonstration of service transparency 
in our SOA environment. The WSDL in WSRR was updated to reflect the new service's endpoint and 
Consumers will make no changes to their code. 
  
No test consumer has been identified.  
 
 
NYC DYCD OSOS Data Conversion  
   
New York City (NYC) Division of Youth & Community Development (DYCD) has been working with NYC 
Small Business Services (SBS) to develop the business requirements and process to convert legacy data 
from their proprietary system into the One Stop Operating System (OSOS).  They must develop a process 
to upload real time data on a regular basis (daily or weekly).  They have provided a timeline and cross-
walk files (available upon request).  Recent information from the United States Department of Labor 
(USDOL) indicates that reporting requirements for Workforce Investment Streamlined Performance 
Reporting (WISPR) will be implemented on 7/1/09, which means New York State will be out of 
compliance if the NYC youth data is not in OSOS.  The NYC youth data constitutes the majority of youth 
data for the state.  Also, the federal software for the WISPR will not provide for the inclusion of a 
Workforce Investment Act Standardized Record Data (WIASRD) file from NYC, which is presently used 
for reporting. 
 
Current Status Report:  This project has been on hold since 7/10/09.  
 
 
Office 2007 Upgrade  
   
This project is to upgrade the Microsoft Office product from the 2003 suite to the 2007 suite for the 
Department of Labor.  This upgrade will enable all divisions to take advantage of additional functionalities 
and fixes.  This will also simplify the task of supporting this application internally.  This version will also be 
more stable than previous versions.  
  
Current Status Report:   07/19/10 Holding off on the push for at least three weeks.  Working on the 
organization of OU's.  Developing three different pushes of software packages to users depending on 
access of ABS, Letter Generator and/or fax viewer. 
 
 
OMH/DOL One Stop Operating System (OSOS) Partnership  
   
The NYS Office of Mental Health (OMH) has been awarded a Medicaid Infrastructure Grant (MIG) that 
focuses on assisting people with disabilities of obtain and maintain competitive jobs. The funding is made 
available to them by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and will be administered in 
partnership with 13 state agencies (the Office of Mental Health; the Office of Mental Retardation and 
Developmental Disabilities; Department of Health; State Office for the Aging; 
 
Education Department; Office of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse Services; Division of Housing and 
Community Renewal; Department of Transportation; Office of Children and Family Services; Office of 
Temporary and Disability Assistance; Division of Veterans Affairs; NYS Department of Labor (NYSDOL); 
and the Commission on Quality of Care and Advocacy for Persons with Disabilities). A partnership called 
the Most Integrated Settings Coordinating Council (MISCC), containing staff from the above agencies is 
responsible for implementing the grant and establishing a partnership that will assist people with 
disabilities to find employment. 
 
The MISCC determined that they needed a common case management system that could be used by all 
partners to track employment related services provided to this population. OMH had experience through a 
DOL contract with OSOS. OMH approached the department to discuss the possibility of OSOS being 
used for this initiative. 
 
In discussions with OMH, we have tentatively planned to develop this partnership during 2010 and 
implement in 2011. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 Hardware sizing details are being worked out. The project scope 
document was created and given to OMH for sign off. OMH provided its comments. DOL Counsel office 
raised some significant issues with respect to UI Confidentiality. The issues are being worked out at DOL 
senior management. Team is set to meet next week to discuss the requirements further.  
 
 
OSOS Consortium Upgrades  
   
This project will provide application enhancements requested by the One Stop Operating System (OSOS) 
Consortium states which include: 
 
Additional edits and reporting changes to accommodate Stimulus Funds  
 
Ability to change job bank job orders to ‘suspend’ status in mediated  
 
Changes to how Inactivated Staff Administrator and office accounts are handled  
 
Adding employer origination method 
 
The New York OSOS production application will be upgraded to v5.2 which will include these change 
control requests and several corrected application errors.   
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/10 The Consortium states continue to work on completing user acceptance 
testing for v5.1.   Version 5.2 was released to the demo site and made available for states to take into 
their test sites. The developers began work on delivering Federal Guidance Clarification for ARRA report 
changes and a low effort change to Display of SSN in Self Service Site, in a v5.2.01 patch.  Business 
requirements for the ARRA report changes were completed and sent for approval.   Developers have 
begun working on business requirements for v5.3. Scope Committee resolved issue for OSOS-152: 
Telephone Extension fields. Staff held the weekly Scope call with all participating states and the weekly 
status meeting with the contracted developers. 
 
 
PBX Replacement - NYC  
   
The PBX equipment at 4 locations in New York City is currently functioning, but needs to be replaced.  
The equipment is more than 10 years old and is no longer manufactured.  Spare parts and 
knowledgeable technicians will be increasingly difficult to find.  Locations involved are 138-60 Barclay 
Street, Flushing; 75 Varick Street, NYC; 9 Bond Street, NYC; and 149th Street, NYC  
 
We plan to develop specifications for a system that would be appropriate for all 4 locations.  If the same 
equipment is in place at all locations, administration will be more efficient, training easier, interconnection 
possible (if that becomes a requirement) and spare parts can be shared.  However, we will start with the 
installation of only one system where it is needed most, in Flushing Queens.  Once that installation has 
been completed, we will evaluate the equipment and vendor prior to moving forward with another 
installation. 
 
Specifications will be developed based on current user needs as well as potential future needs such as 
call center, IP and telecommuting capabilities.  
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 The disapproved request for funding is being discussed at the 
executive level.  We are evaluating other sites for possible system replacement.   A request for 400 Oak 
Street is still pending, but has not progressed in several weeks.     
 
 
PeopleSoft Travel Software Implementation  
   
This project will allow the NYS Department of Labor (DOL) to implement/pilot Oracle/Peoplesoft Travel 
software purchased by the New York Financial Management System (NYFMS) for an on-line paperless 
travel system. Currently, DOL employees who travel must submit a paper travel voucher to receive travel 
reimbursement.  This travel software will eventually be rolled out to all state agencies.  
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 Team members from Finance and Planning & Technology have 
reviewed a high level design and will review the document for a final sign off.  We had no meeting this 
week due to vacation schedules.  
 
 
Primavera Upgrade to v7.0  
 
The Primavera P6 Enterprise Project Portfolio Management application needs to be upgraded to v7.0 
from v6.0 to allow users and administrators to take advantage of the enhancements and fixes that have 
been included.   
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 A Primavera technician contacted our technical services department 
but the Progress Reporter application has not been installed successfully on the development server.  
 
 
Safety and Loss Prevention Incentive Program  
   
Chapter 6, Section 33 of the Labor Laws of 2007, titled the 2007 New York Workers' Compensation Law 
Reform, amended Article 7, Section 134(6-10) of the Workers' Compensation Law has charged the 
Commissioner of Labor with developing a workplace safety and loss prevention incentive program which 
encourages eligible employers to voluntarily implement a Safety Incentive Program, a Drug and Alcohol 
Prevention Program, and/or a Return to Work Program in exchange for a reduction in workers' 
compensation insurance premiums, or a reduction in security deposits in the case of self-insured 
employers.  The Commissioner was given the responsibility for monitoring all incentive plans 
implemented by the employer and for establishing rules for the certification of safety and loss 
management specialists who perform such services.     
 
This project will assist the Division of Safety and Health in successfully implementing this program by 
providing a means by which employers can view program information and instructions, access samples of 
model incentive programs, and apply for one or more of the three incentive programs.  It will also enable 
individuals to apply for specialist certificates in any of the three incentive areas so that they may assist 
employers with the development of their safety and loss prevention program.  Internal DOL staff will be 
able to review and approve applications and monitor the on-going implementation of employers' 
programs. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 Project team completed three services:  RetrieveInsuranceCarrierList 
RetrieveAllWorkerCompensations and RetrieveWorkerCompensationDetails.  This last service was 
integrated with the GUI. The employer service was further modified so we can add the Workers' 
Compensation carrier's address. Some of the static pages needed for the customer demo were 
completed. The BA continued working on test cases.  The customer was not available to attend the status 
meeting. 
 
 
Service Center Procedures  
 
This project includes the installation of the internal and external Knowledge Base modules of the Service 
Center Application, which utilizes Numara FootPrints version 8.1.  It also includes the development of 
additional reports created within the FootPrints structure.  If FootPrints is unable to provide the required 
reports, other tools will be considered such as Crystal Reports or Cognos software.  In addition, desk-to-
desk procedures with the Office for Technology's Help Desk will be documented.  New York State 
Department of Labor already owns the product and has an adequate number of licenses to complete 
these enhancements.  
 
Current Status Report:  8/13/10 The original project basically had been completed, but we are retooling 
the Service Center Application (A-Info).  The entire project is being reviewed for changes to meet 
managements latest concerns in additional to changes that we see would be beneficial to our 
organization.  Much of the primary Service Center Application is completed; we are currently working on 
the escalation processes and blending in the change management application into the main project. 
 
Impediment:  We are having difficulties finding time to work on our projects and still run the day to day 
business including incident management.  
 
 
Software Tracking  
   
Establish a process to track the location and use of all purchased DOL software licenses. This is needed 
to ensure we know where our licensed software is located, who it is assigned to, and that it is actually 
being used.  In addition this will provide a means to accurately account for all the software and to verify it 
is used in compliance with the terms of each license. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 The regularly scheduled import of all System Center Configuration 
Management (SCCM) files occurred. One additional Asset Manager client was deployed on a Unix server 
last week, and two clients were deployed on laptop computers.  There were no new clients installed on 
Windows servers. Followed up with the Office For Technology (OFT) on deploying Asset Manager clients 
on hosted servers and alternatives to deploying it to desktop computers.  OFT is still investigating.  
Installed the new Inventory Manager software on a server.  Working with the vendor to resolve access 
issues. 
 
 
State Financial System OSC Bulkload Certification  
   
This project is to modify the NYSDOL’s accounting system (FARS) so that DOL can continue to interface 
with the Office of the State Controller (OSC) using OSC’s new State Financial System.   
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 The project team performed the following tasks this reporting period: 
 
Conducted weekly meeting to report progress of project. 
 
Held daily scrums. 
 
Turned over testing of NY71 vendor screen programming UPDATE and ADD testing  to users. 
 
Install  of mainframe Uncombine changes completed. 
 
WIA  Uncombine testing to start next week. 
 
Continued work on IN43 screen changes. 
 
Continued work on PC22 screen changes.  
 
Reviewed the CA5MEALS job. 
 
Created a 2nd version of the Changes to FARS document that eliminates items that were crossed 
out and to update dates. 
 
M161 reports sent to users for review. Corrections made based on feedback 
 
Continued to investigate problems with data not transmitting properly.  
 
Attended SFS Bulkload Q&A session. 
 
 
Telephone Call Center Collaboration Assessment  
 
The purpose of this project is to investigate opportunities for call center collaboration with other New York 
State governmental entities and to implement call center collaboration beginning with the New York State 
Insurance Fund. The New York State Department of Labor (NYSDOL) has an established and mature call 
center operation with resources that could possibly be shared at an overall savings to the State.  The 
NYSDOL telephony infrastructure currently supports over 300 call center agents in three agency 
locations; Albany, NY, Glendale, NY, and Troy, NY.  NYSDOL’s potentially sharable assets include: 
 
 
Call Center Infrastructure – Telephony hardware and software, i.e., trunks, servers, switches, 
Computer Telephony Integration (CTI), Interactive Voice Response, (IVR), outbound dialing, etc., 
as well as applications to be installed by the end of State Fiscal Year 2009-2010 which will 
manage call prioritization, on-hold scheduled call back, and web chat. 
 
Call Center Agent Human Resources – trained staff are available to accept and direct calls, and 
perform real-time inquires and updates on behalf of callers. 
 
Any or all of the above assets have the potential to be shared.  NYSDOL might collaborate with another 
governmental entity by sharing Call Center Agents.  Voice ports, CTI, IVR, outbound dialing, on-hold 
scheduled call back or web chat might be shared individually or in any combination. 
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 The Customer weekly meeting was postponed due to vacation.  The 
policy and procedure document draft is complete.  The document is being vetted.  Comments are being 
reviewed and the document adjusted.  
 
 
Trade Act MIS  
   
The NYS Department of Labor (DOL) has applied for a grant for improvements to technology related to 
data collection for the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program.  Eighty percent of this grant money 
will be set aside to implement a new TAA Case Management System.  Work is in the early stages of 
analysis and documentation of the current work process and data flow.  The Workforce Development & 
Training division intends to continue their current activities through to the development and release of a 
new system.  Once the system is released, the need for their services will be drastically reduced. 
 
The planned TAA Management System will replace and integrate multiple stand-alone data systems used 
to administer and report on the TAA program  
  
Current Status Report:   8/20/10 Project Status: The new petition, petition notes, claimant, application, 
document creation, claimant determination, and parts of the waiver modules have been deployed to the 
test site.  The TAA project completed development for Waiver, except for incorporating changes for the 
common human task service.  The LDAP entitlements have been created by the NYS Office for 
Technology (OFT), the project team is working on integrating the Identity Management Service into the 
code for the Petition Module.  The team continued to work with the xPression group to finalize document 
templates.  The team continues to plan for PeopleSoft integration for the financial sections; the project 
began developing funding screens and designing fund request process in relation to the Job 
Search/Relocation Allowance and Training modules. The project team held the weekly status meeting 
with the customer. 
 
Project Impediment:  The project team is awaiting deployment of a generic human task service to the 
development environment. The team cannot complete the waiver module or the fund request modules 
until the human task service is completed.   
 
Sprint Name: Correct Application Issues  Start Date:  8/1/10 Planned End Date:  9/17/10  Status: On 
Schedule 
 
Sprint Status:  Project team began work on the next set of outstanding application issues for correction. 
 
Sprint Accomplishments:  The project team worked on fixes for employer. 
 
Sprint Impediments: None 
 
Sprint Name:  PeopleSoft Integration with Screens   Start Date: 7/26/10  Planned End Date:  9/10/10  
Status: On Schedule 
 
Sprint Status:  Project is working to integrate the PeopleSoft services with application. 
 
Sprint Accomplishments:  The project team continues to work on the Claimant Fiscal Summary page. 
 
Sprint Impediments:  none 
 
Sprint Name: Integrate Identity Management for Petition Module  Start Date:  7/12/10 Planned End Date:  
8/30/10  Status: On Schedule 
 
Sprint Status:  Project team began work on integrating the service for user security. 
 
Sprint Accomplishments:  The project team successfully integrated the framework for the petition module.  
 
Sprint Impediments: Issues discovered while integrating need to be resolved by EPAS before work can 
complete. 
 
Sprint Name: Fund Request Development Design  Start Date:  8/1/10 Planned End Date:  9/17/10  
Status: On Schedule 
 
Sprint Status:  Project team began work on technical design for the training fund request. 
 
Sprint Accomplishments:  The database tables were created in the test environment. The service model 
was created and process models have been started. 
 
Sprint Impediments: None 
 
 
Transfer of NYS Job Bank from AJE to JobCentral NLX  
   
Replace the current NYS Job Exchange hosted by AJE to a new site to be hosted by JobCentral National 
Labor Exchange (NLX).  We have had escalating problems with AJE due to ongoing changes being made 
to make the site self-supporting and/or profitable. These changes include the charging of fees for service 
to both job seekers and employers, advertising, move of the customer support services to India, and 
expanding partnerships with other fee-charging job sites allowing more listings that are suspect. There is 
little to no notice of significant changes being made to the site and insufficient firewall protections 
between the NYS hosted site and the national public site. In addition, AJE has taken the position that they 
'own' the employer job order data from employer registered with the NYS site. This is in conflict with the 
state's understanding when the hosting arrangement was made. Note that New Jersey has already 
severed their relation with AJE for this reason and we understand that Kentucky is moving in that 
direction as well. At the same time we have seen major improvements to the JobCentral NLX site. Since 
inception the JobCentral site has grown significantly and now has the participation of as many more 
states than AJB had prior to termination (while AJE has comparatively few states participating at this 
point). Through the JobCentral association with NASWA, the needs of the public labor exchange and the 
State's participation on the JobCentral operations committee have direct input into changes and 
enhancements made to the site. JobCentral limits the sources of jobs coming into the NLX, thus providing 
the states with more protection against the types of problems seen with AJE. In addition, JobCentral staff 
is much more responsive to requests from states and offer many other advantages thru their association 
with NASWA and their employer membership.  This change has been approved by executive level staff.  
In addition, Counsel's office has agreed that this change is within the terms of the current contracts that 
NYSDOL has with both Navisite/AJE and 
DEA/JobCentral NLX, so no additional procurement process steps are needed. 
  
Current Status Report: 08/20/10 The weekly customer status meeting was held on Wednesday at 12:30 
pm.  Data Exchange Out from OSOS was changed to JC on 7/29 and are conducting post-project clean-
up.  JobCentral assigned their own origination method codes to jobs that send to OSOS. Since all of the 
JobCentral jobs in OSOS changed, it took more than a day to load the file. 
 
 
UI Additional Claims on Web  
   
The purpose of this project is to add functionality to the UI Benefits Web application for additional claims.  
 
Current Status Report:  08/13/10 The development team, analysts and functional managers have 
agreed upon the high level requirements and approach for the project.  The technical lead is working on a 
shell prototype.  
 
 
UI Address Normalization Project  
   
The purpose of this proposal is to initiate a project to add functionality to the UI Benefits Web application 
for address normalization.   
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 Address Normalization service design was discussed with the 
appropriate architecture resources.  It was decided to forgo building in an extra level of abstraction for the 
service and stick with the architected solution from the Proof of Concept. 
  
The address files that support the Address Normalization service are only valid for a short period of time.  
In trying to resurrect the Proof of Concept, it was discovered that these address files have both expired 
and need to updated.  Since the department has not yet purchased these address files, we need to 
continue to receive 'evaluation' copies from the vendor.  Until such time as the purchase is completed, 
this will be a continuing problem.  Database is aware of this issue and is working towards a resolution. 
 
 
UI Appeal Board Replacement  
   
The purpose of this project is to create a UI Appeals Board system and processes which will improve 
NYSDOL's ability to provide quality and flexible services to Claimants and Employers.    The new system 
will replace the current Cúram-based system with a modernized, service oriented application.  It will also 
provide desired improvements and enhancements. The completed application will provide DOL staff the 
ability to work more effectively and efficiently by automating business activity to reduce redundancy and 
errors, create electronic files and forms and automate the implementation of hearing decisions to reduce 
cycle time. It will also create an Appeals Board system that will provides a self-service portal for various 
customer needs, such as: protest monetary and non-monetary determinations; provide customers with 
status updates; provide the functionality to withdraw a hearing or an appeal, as well as functionality for 
effected parties to read hearing and appeal decisions and request an appeal of those decisions. This 
project will also provide a mechanism for an employer to proceed to an Informal Conference for a hearing 
request based on an audit determination. This project will also provide NYSDOL users with electronic 
hearing files, eliminating the manual routing of paper hearing cases. 
  
Current Status Report8/20/10   
 
Project Status:  The Project Team is working through the tasks of Sprint One, which includes the 
development of the screens for the Claimant portion of the New York Use Case: Complete a Hearing 
Request and the preparation of the Use Case Specification Documents for the Employer portion of the 
Use Case. The Project Manager and the Business Analysts are working with Customer Representatives 
from the Appeal Board, Unemployment Insurance and the Adjudication Services Office to finalize the 
additions and adjustments needed to satisfy New York’s requirements. The Executive Secretary for the 
Appeal Board, the Chief Administrative Law Judge, the Project Manager, the Staff Supervisor and the 
Business Analysts completed the review of the Claimant screens to Complete a Hearing Request. The 
Chief Administrative Law Judge agreed to provide the team with additional information concerning the 
mandated languages for Web Page translations, legal documents and Appeal Board communications. 
The Executive Secretary plans to schedule a meeting with Appeal Board personnel and members of 
Planning and Technology to discuss plans to coordinate the efforts of the Appeal Board, the Re-Write 
Project Team and the Legacy Maintenance Team to provide assistance to improve efficiency for case 
processing. The Weekly Customer meeting was held as scheduled. Sprint Name:  Sprint One: Appeal 
Board ReWrite Development - NYUseCase1027 Complete a Hearing Request (Claimant) Preparation. 
Sprint Timeline (6 weeks). Starts: 7/28/2010 Planned End Date: 9/8/2010 Timeline Status: On Schedule 
(Ahead of Schedule, On Schedule, Behind Schedule, Blocked, On-Hold)   
 
Sprint Status:  The Project Team resolved an issue related to the implementation of the GUI validation 
framework, collaborated with the User Representatives to finalize the Use Case requirements for the 
Claimant and conducted an initial review of the employer screens.  Daily scrums are being held.   
 
Sprint Accomplishments this week:  The Developers worked with the Enterprise Architect who developed 
the GUI Framework Validation to resolve an issue with the implementation in the Appeal Board project.  
The Developers began to incorporate Exception Handling standards into the implementation of the 
screens. The Project Manager and the Developers participated in Scrum Master training with the 
Consultant who has been performing that function for several of the Modernization Developer Teams.  
The Business Analyst incorporated the feedback from the Unemployment Insurance and the Adjudication 
Services Office User representatives concerning the initial review of the Employer screens for Completing 
a Hearing request. The Team participated in daily scrums and team meetings for further guidance and 
coordination. 
 
 Project Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:  None at this time  
 
 
UI Audit and Investigation Case Management System  
   
The purpose of this project is to re-design the Case Management System (CMS) currently used by UI Tax 
Enforcement Staff.  The project includes automating the selection of audits and investigations, manual 
requests for investigations, routing the assignments to the correct enforcement staff, transferring 
assignments between offices and staff, facilitate the scheduling of field staff appointments, allowing 
enforcement supervisors to manage assignments, and providing workflow for supervisory and Quality 
Assurance review of completed assignments.     
 
The Case Management System is a mainframe based system that contains cases that have been 
automatically selected for follow-up work enforcement work.  There are a number of reasons why a case 
might be selected.  Examples are for Failure to File (FTF) a wage report, or for a delinquent wage report.  
Not all cases are selected automatically.  Some are manually generated, such as Miscellaneous cases 
and Liability cases, and must be keyed in by the Central Assignment and Collection unit (CACS) staff.   
The follow up work in the Case Management System might be work performed in the Central Assignment 
and Collection unit, (a UI Tax Enforcement unit) or an assignment to be handled in the field by UI Tax 
Services.    The Case Management System was not completed when it was originally built.  It does not 
include Benefit Claims Investigations and Collection Assignments.  Bank Levies are also not in the Case 
Management System.  Bank Levies are handled external to CMS in a Microsoft Access Bank Levy 
application.   The Bank Levy System records pertinent information about employers bank accounts, 
warrants placed against employers, and levies sent to banks to collect against employers’ accounts, and 
the status of those levies.  
 
This project will also develop a portable computer system to facilitate field work done by UI Tax Auditors 
and Tax Compliance Agents, and replace the current Tax Services Database Management System 
(TSDBMS).  This includes data gathering via keyboard input and file import, calculations of amounts due, 
estimation of amounts due, collection of amounts due, penalty and interest calculations, report 
generation, data upload and download with primary UI system, forms generation, daily activities reporting, 
electronic signature capture, and calendar synchronization.  
 
The current Tax Services Database Management System was developed using Microsoft Access.  It is 
deployed on laptops that UI Tax Auditors and Tax Compliance Agents bring into the field to record the 
results of their assignments.  The UI Tax Auditors and Tax Compliance Agents receive their assignments 
as paper printouts sent from the Central Assignment and Collection Services unit (CACS).  The data 
enter the assignment information into TSDBMS.  Manual input of employer information wastes Field Staff 
and employer time, and is subject to keying errors.   
 
The results of each field assignment are printed.  Investigation assignments are mailed to the District 
Supervisor, who reviews each assignment.  Afterward, the District Supervisor sends the reviewed 
assignment paperwork to the central office for Quality Assurance unit review.  Audit assignments are sent 
directly to the CACS.  The need to print and mail completed assignment paperwork wastes paper, time, 
and postage.  Some information is uploaded from the field staffs’ TSDBMS to a server, where it is 
downloaded into to the Microsoft Access based system called the Assignment Register.  The Assignment 
Register maintains a history of field assignments and is used for Federal and NYS reporting.  
 
Current Status Report: 8/20/10  (Agile Development Project)   
 
Project Status:  Phase two includes enhancements to the query system (ledger details, address [physical 
and mailing] synchronization, incorporating addresses in searches), required changes identified during 
the pilot of release one and development of the assignment workflow system.  Sprints four through eight 
are now complete.  Sprint four accomplishments include: system requirements specification (SRS), user 
interface specification and business rules, technical artifacts (system context model, component model, 
architectural overview diagram, GUI prototype, service model, architectural decision document) and 
service specifications.  The business calendar and ID generator utility components were completed.  A 
proof of concept (POC) was done for forms digitization (five forms).  Sprint five was an abbreviated three 
week effort that concentrated on modifications and enhancements to release one (name search 
refinements, address search, quarterly reporting history from ledger, flags on employer profile) while we 
worked with EPAS to finalize some design decisions needed to move forward with the project.  Sprint six 
included a new search using NAICS code, incorporating some additional business rules for the quarterly 
reporting history from ledger screen and preparation of test scenarios and test scripts for UAT.  Sprint 
seven included A&I v1.1 implementation and the start of core functional foundation development based 
on the PA assets.  Sprint eight focused on redesigning the core components for Case Management 
(liable employer, claim and audit case) and Interested Party Management (employer, worker and TPA) to 
service enable them.  A weekly meeting is held with the customer to discuss the project status. 
 
The team is working on building core foundation pieces (core case management, core workflow, core 
interested party management, etc.) for the modernized system using the PA assets.  Development of the 
assignment workflow system will follow and will build on these.   
 
Sprint Name:  Sprint Nine:  Core Functional Foundation Development - Case Management and Interested 
Party Management Service Delivery.  Sprint Timeline (6 weeks). Starts: 7/19/2010 Planned End Date: 
8/27/2010 Timeline Status: On Schedule (Ahead of Schedule, On Schedule, Behind Schedule, Blocked, 
On-Hold)   
 
Sprint Status:  The team's efforts have shifted to build core functional foundation pieces (core case 
management, core workflow, core interested party management, etc.) for the modernized system using 
the PA assets.  These will be used by the A&I system and others.  The goal for this sprint is to deliver 
Case Management (CMS) and Interested Party Management (IPM) uses cases with respect to employer 
registration, claimant registration and profile management.  Development continued with Release 2 
versions of IPM Create Employer, Get Employer, Update Employer, Search Employer, Create Worker, 
Get Worker, Update Worker, Search Worker, Create TPA, Get TPA, Update TPA and Search TPA, 
Create Predecessor/Successor Association, Create Owner Officer, Search Owner Officer and Get Owner 
Officer now completed.  Development is also complete for Release 2 CMS search cases (by Case ID, 
Worker IP ID, Worker Last Name and SSN, Claimant IP ID, Audit Case and Liable Employer Case). Code 
review, refactoring, integration with the new UCMSDBA3 schema and unit testing are in progress.  The 
team is creating NY versions of the PA use cases for CMS and IPM.  The team is also finishing up 
working with the database group to maintain additions and changes to the physical and mailing 
addresses in the enterprise database.  Additionally the core team has created a service specification for 
the Address Verification service and is working with the UI Address Normalization project to create the 
service(s) required.  Daily scrums are being held.   
 
Sprint Accomplishments this week:  Monitoring of the latest A&I release (v1.1) and work on maintaining 
daily additions and changes to the addresses in the enterprise database.  With the latest hardware 
update, the A&I application has been successfully promoted to the first level of the new environment and 
is now being upgraded to WAS 7.0.  The A&I User Manual (v2.1) update has been finalized and 
distributed to field staff.  Work on utilizing the core functional foundation pieces for the PA assets 
continued for Case Management and Interested Party Management.  Use cases were completed for 
Create Employer Record, Create TPA Record, Create Worker Record, Create Association, Update 
Association and Create Predecessor/Successor Association.  Completed development and testing of 
Create Owner Officer, Get Owner Officer and Search Owner Officer.    
 
Project Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:  None at this time 
 
 
UI Benefit Adjudication  
 
This project will redesign processes related to the adjudication of non-monetary issues.  At the present 
time, claim issues are identified automatically based upon information supplied when the claimant files 
the claim through the Internet or the phone, once the claimant has completed the claim, the information is 
submitted to one of the Mainframe applications called Unemployment Benefits Wage Reporting system 
(UBWR).  Every morning the Telephone Claims Centers (TCCs) download claims with issues from the 
UBWR system into a Microsoft Access system which is referred to as Case Management.  Once the 
UBWR data is in Case Management, the adjudication units sort and query the information based on their 
assignment needs.  For example, the Adjudication Units will sort the Case Management data by the last 4 
digits of the Social Security Number and assign them to adjudicators within specific ranges (e.g., from 
0000 to 1054).  Adjudications Units will also sort the Case Management data into Spanish claims (Local 
Office 809, 839, 889), or all the claims with a given effective date.   
 
Assignments are given to adjudicators via the Cases Management System.  The adjudicators accept 
cases, and annotate results in the Microsoft Access Case Management System.  To adjudicate claims 
issues, adjudicators frequently contact claimants and employers to gather information needed to make 
eligibility determinations. They may call either party, or send forms or questionnaires to obtain 
information.  When adjudicators take statements via telephone, they transcribe the statement into forms 
that exist in the Letter Generator System.  Those forms are automatically imaged and saved with the 
claimant’s imaged file.  When adjudicators request written information, they later look for written 
responses from claimants by manually searching the File Access Facility (FAF), to see if correspondence 
or questionnaires were returned and imaged.  Adjudicators view UBWR mainframe inquiry screens, and 
run COGNOS reports to research information that was reported when claimants filed their Original Claim.  
This is done to compare it to statements made to the adjudicators.  In instances where there are 
discrepancies, the adjudicators send the COGNOS reports to be imaged by UI Division Central Support 
to be added to the claimants image file.   
 
The current automated method of supporting claims adjudication is inefficient.  Much time is lost in 
adjudicating claims, and information is not fully captured or used to automatically drive the process.  
Information is stored in disparate nonintegrated systems, and is frequently captured only in image form, 
rather than as data.  Information needed by adjudicators is spread across the FAF system, UBWR 
system, Case Management System, and Voice/Web system (accessed via COGNOS).  Many 
applications in use are no longer supported.   
  
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 (Agile Development Project)  
 
Project Status: The adjudication team held a conference call with the state of New Jersey to discuss their 
upcoming implementation of the federal Separation Information Database System (SIDES). We also 
continued analysis of adjudication systems requirements, assessed and validated Pennsylvania non-
monetary use cases, worked on creation of Pennsylvania-style 'smart forms', collaborated with the user 
interface development team and continued discussion with the multi-state consortium. We are 
consolidating the lessons learned from the SIDES conference and the discussions with New Jersey and 
with the third party agent company. Goals, activities and deliverables for the next sprint are being 
planned. Business customers were updated with project status and progress.      
 
Sprint Name: between sprints. Sprint Timeline ( ) Start Date: Planned End Date: Timeline Status: (Ahead 
of Schedule, On Schedule, Behind Schedule, Blocked, On-Hold) 
 
Between-Sprint Status:  Technical staff continued system and data analysis. Business analysts continued 
use case review, fit gap analysis and issue resolution.  
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week: 
 
Continued PA asset use case and interface review and analysis.  
 
Analyzed adjudication systems and data flow.  
 
Held discussions with New Jersey to learn about their impending SIDES implementation. 
 
Project Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:  None.  
 
 
UI Benefit Ledger Replacement  
 
This project will replace the current Claimant Benefit Ledger with a newer, and easier to use ledger.  The 
current ledger was written several decades ago and is no longer able to efficiently handle today’s UI 
Benefits business. Programming maintenance is risky because code has been pieced together over many 
years. Also, a great deal of information currently stored on the ledger is not financial information. This 
project will separate information currently stored on the claimant ledger into the financial transaction 
information and the employer charging information. Because this data is interrelated, a relationship must 
be created to provide the ability to view employer charges associated with a payment and view payments 
associated with an employer’s charges. 
 
Currently, few adjustments to the ledger are automated. Most require UI staff to calculate the adjustment 
amounts and enter the transactions into a batch update process. There are limited edits on the entries; 
therefore, transactions are frequently rejected during the batch run because the transactions do not 
balance.  Adjustment transactions will be calculated and posted to the ledger automatically in as many 
cases as possible.  UI staff will be able to post transactions on-line that cannot be posted automatically.   
 
Other processes that use the ledger information may require interface capabilities, such as the 
overpayment system, jump keys that access the ledger, and the master file build. In addition, OTDA also 
accesses this information. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 Agile Development 
 
Schedule:  POC Sprint: June 21, 2010 until Sept 30, 2010: In Progress 
 
Status Summary:  The team identified the Post Receivables to Ledger and the Pay Benefits Use Cases to 
be modeled and presented to UID customer. The project EPAS resource has executed code for the Post 
Receivable to Ledger. Additional questions were generated and documented for the PA Architect. A 
spreadsheet was started that will document what methods are calling other components. The team is 
close to understanding the ledger update process. The customer status meeting was held. 
 
Accomplishments:  Two transaction types for presentation to the customer were identified.  Modeling of 
the Employer and Benefits Use Cases and transactions continued. 
 
 
UI Benefits Certification  
   
This project is intended to re-design of all of the processes associated with weekly certification for regular 
UI benefits. It also includes the re-design of all of the processes associated with weekly certification for UI 
special programs including shared work, TRA, DUA and SEP.  This project will leverage the existing voice 
web platform to implement the enhancements designed by UISIM for the processes associated with UI 
weekly certifications. It includes modifying the existing platform to allow self-service web certifications for 
shared work claimants/employers, TRA claimants, SEP claimants and DUA claimants currently accepted 
in paper form only. This project will add the necessary front end screens/rules/logic and backend logic to 
process certifications on-line for all of the special programs claimants. The special programs certification 
functionality includes an on-line application for shared work employers to submit weekly certifications on 
behalf of their shared work employees. The design allows the employer to complete one certification for 
all of the employees at once. Today, the shared work employer is required to complete the bottom portion 
the paper certification separately for each employee.  It also includes the enhancements to the 
certification application to collect last employer information for additional claims. 
 
This project will also upgrade the weekly certification application on the voice web platform to allow for 
missed certification weeks on the web. Currently, when a claimant forgets to certify for a given week and 
then calls to certify the next week they need to speak with a TCC representative to submit the certification 
for the missed week. Once the skip week functionality is implemented, the system will accept the 
certification for the missed (skip) week without human intervention.  
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 (Agile Development Project) 
 
Backlog Item: File Continued Claim Internet (R3USE790) 
 
Sprint 8: File a Clean Certification: Timeline (TBD) Started: 8/12/2010, Planned End Date: 9/30/2010, 
Timeline Status: On Schedule (Ahead of Schedule, On Schedule, Behind Schedule, Blocked, On-Hold)  
 
Sprint 8 Overview: File a Clean Certification:  Deliverables: Update Use Case R3USE790 to reflect 
processes for filing a single week clean certification, documented screen validations, updated business 
rules in iLog, analysis to determine first alternate path to be developed in the next sprint, Technical 
Specifications (Service Architecture, Domain Model, Data Model, Service Specification), prototypes 
modified to reflect updated Use Case, data model mapped to business object model. 
 
Sprint Status:  Primavera scheduling for Sprint 8 was completed this week. The Business Analysts have 
started updating the Use Case documentation and documenting the screen validations. Some progress 
was impacted this week due a 3 day absence of the lead Business Analyst who was attending a 
conference. Service analysis and design continued this week for development of the Service Model. A 
cross reference of business objects to the data model was developed. This cross reference will be 
validated and updated according to a new PA code drop anticipated to be delivered in late August. The 
customer status meeting was held. 
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week: 
 
Service design was started. 
 
Primavera activity scheduling for Sprint 8 was completed. 
 
Updates to R3USE790 Use Case were started. 
 
Project Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:  None  
 
 
UI Benefits Intake  
 
The Unemployment Insurance Benefits Intake (UI Ben Intake) project is one of many projects in the larger 
Unemployment Insurance System Improvement (UISIM) initiative.  This project is intended to take an 
agile approach to the enhancement, or re-design, of the processes associated with intake for regular UI 
benefits including the Remote Initial Claims (RIC) application.   
 
Some of the existing procedures for processing claims are paper driven, manual processes.  Other 
existing systems were built with technology that is no longer supported.  This poses a potential risk of not 
being able to fully recover from a system failure.  The migration of targeted mainframe programs and 
database structures is essential to continue to provide claimants with the ability to submit an original 
claim. 
 
The first major deliverable of this project will be Shared Work.  It will be conducted as a sub-project of the 
overall Benefit Intake project.  It will produce 3 major deliverables: 1) Implement the Shared Work 
question on the Web Original Claim system to enable Shared Work Claimants to submit self service 
Unemployment Insurance claims 2) Enable upload of employers' Shared Work Plans 3) Enable the UI 
Division to add and maintain the employers' Shared Work Plans.   
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010   (Agile Development Project) 
 
Project Status for UI Benefits Intake:  Work continues to get the Shared Work application and related 
components working on the Staging servers. Performance testing was conducted and the results are 
being reviewed. The Claimant Profile and Preference Management team has reviewed the GUI with the 
analysts and a business customer review is scheduled for next week. The Initial Claim-Employment 
History team has identified the initial claim database and is working to identify the accuracy and 
completeness of the schema.  
 
Sprint Name: Intake-SW2-9 -Develop next release of the Shared Work Application for Shared Work Unit   
 
Sprint Timeline:   Planned End Date: 6/4/2010, Timeline Status: Open 
 
Sprint Status:  The Shared Work Team is working with Technical Services, Release Management and 
Enterprise Architect Staff to properly configure servers for the Shared Work web application and related 
components on the Staging servers.  The Performance Testing Team is compiling the testing results and 
will schedule discussion with the entire team. The Database Team is assisting in troubleshooting an issue 
with the SW scheduler that is needed to delete bookmarked plans that have never been submitted.  
 
Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate: 
 
The employer role user acceptance testing cannot be scheduled until the Common Authentication 
is available.   
 
The siteminder logout process has been found to be not working according to the required 
behavior.  The team architect is working with the OFT resource to change it to the required 
behavior.  This will impact other web applications.  
 
There is a 4 hour active session timeout limit.  This is not acceptable to the user community.  This 
is a policy decision under discussion by upper management. A decision is expected on this next 
week.  
 
Sprint Name: Intake - Claimant Profile & Preference Management - Sprint 1 - Complete Claimant Profile 
and Preference Management. Sprint Timeline: (6 weeks) 
 
Start Date: 7/20/2010 Planned End Date: 8/30/2010, Timeline Status: Open 
 
Sprint Status:  The Business Analysts met with the customers on Tuesday and provided them with a 
demo of the Profile and Preferences GUI.  The analysts are now in the process of creating a screenshot 
flow for a final review for the users. In addition, the PA use cases are being updated to reflect the NY 
business.  EPAS has completed the review of the technical specification document and have made some 
suggestions that are still pending within their group.  They will next review the wsdl/xsds.  The service 
developers are coding and are working on integrating with the interested party service developed by the 
core team.  Some delays have been encountered for the profile team as a result of coding/environment 
issues with the core team.  The solution architect is working on a collective effort with the other teams to 
standardize the transformation of the wsdl/xsds.  The GUI developers are continuing to work on 
validations and incorporating changes requested by the analysts. All code is still residing locally on 
developer desktops. 
 
Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:  
 
The Clearcase stream is not yet available forcing both the 2 GUI developers and the 2 Service 
developers to work directly from their desktops and manually sync up their code. Scrum Master 
has reported the problem to management and the team architect is requesting a date from the 
Clearcase group. In the mean time, developers are syncing up their code at the end of each 
business day. 
 
The instability of the code from the core team and having a proper deployment in dev. The profile 
team is stubbing out the sections as necessary to move forward during this sprint.  The core team 
has relayed that their issues should be resolved by COB Monday, August 23.  
 
Sprint Name: Intake - Initial Claim-Employment History Sprint 0 - Military and Federal Employment History 
 
Sprint Timeline: Start Date: 8/3/2010   Planned End Date: 8/31/2010, Timeline Status: Open 
 
Sprint Status:  The technical specifications document for the Federal Employment (UCFE), Military 
Employment (UCFX) are complete and have been reviewed by the team.  It has been discovered that the 
Search Federal Employer will be reused by many of the Benefits sub domains. Technical analysis to 
identify the ICON interface specifications and requirements to send and receive messages has begun.  
Analysis of the Employment History related domain attributes to map to the database attributes and user 
interface prototype attributes has begun. The Employment History service operations as well as Core 
operations have been identified.  This will be used to create the service specifications needed to begin 
service development. The PA user interface prototypes for the Employment History use cases have been 
converted to NY prototypes.   
 
Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate: none 
 
 
UI Benefits Web Chat 
 
The purpose of this proposal is to initiate a project to add Web Chat functionality to the UI Benefits Web 
application for claimants. 
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 The Customer meeting was postponed due to vacations.  We are 
tracking the progress for IC upgrade which needs to be completed prior to Web Chat going live.  A 
demonstration to the Unemployment Insurance division is scheduled for next week.  
 
 
UI eFile Core Application & Address Change 
 
This is a joint agency project where the NYS Department of Labor (Labor) and the NYS Department of 
Taxation and Finance (DTF) are collaborating to deliver an Internet application for the electronic filing of 
the NYS-45, Quarterly Combined Withholding, Wage Reporting and Unemployment Insurance return, in 
compliance with the US Department of Labor grant proposal which will partially fund the project. The 
application will give a population of 500,000 employers and 20,000 tax preparers the option to:  complete 
and file the NYS-45 quarterly return through a web application, make electronic payments, upload 
employee wage information and report a change of address via a separate web application. 
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 The application continues to perform well without any major issues 
encountered.  Volumes continue to increase at varying rates each filing period. 
 
 
UI Employer Home Page - Consolidated Accts Receivable    
 
The Scope of this project is to expand the functionality of the Employer Home Page application, which is 
a live application used by NYS employers seeking information regarding their account with the 
Department of Labor.  The current application displays profile and rate information.  The UI division has 
identified the first enhancements they would like to add to the Employer Home Page.   
 
They are: the addition of benefit charge information, total accounts receivable and list of NYS45's that are 
delinquent.  The addition of this information will reduce the burden of L&D and EAAS staff responding to 
employer inquiries.   
 
Benefit Charges: The application will display charge amount, credit charges, last 4 digits of SSN of 
claimant, charge date, LO400 and IA96 form date.  The application will allow a search, sort ability.   
 
Accounts Receivable: The application will display the total amount owed by the employer including 
quarterly return amounts, penalties, interest to date and rate at which interest is accruing.  In addition, 
directions on how to pay along with payment documents and the list of NYS45's that are delinquent will 
be added to the screen. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010   (Agile Development Project) 
 
Project Status:  The project will allow employers to view their accounts receivable status and benefit 
charge information on the employer home page once they have authenticated themselves through Labor 
Online Services (Common Authentication).  The team has completed the development and testing of the 
Accounts Receivable display functionality and will implement it two weeks after the Labor On-Line 
Services (Common Authentication Project) is in production and stable (currently estimated for the end of 
June).   
 
The team has completed development of the application and the application functionality has been 
accepted by the users.  However, none of the new functionality can be implemented until employers can 
authenticate who they are through Labor On-line Services.  The project will remain open until the 
application is successfully deployed to production, and some minor operational activities still need to 
occur but no new sprints will be started.        
 
A Customer Meeting was held this week to update them on the status of the project. 
 
Sprint Name: Complete development of the application code to display Benefit Charge information, record 
protest flags and retrieve IA-96 forms stored in OnDemand and put the code through User Acceptance 
testing.  
 
Sprint Timeline N/A days, Started: N/A, Planned End Date: N/A, Timeline Status: The sprint ended on 
3/31.   
 
Sprint Status: The sprint ended without being able to implement the code in production.    
 
Activities completed this Week:  Corrected address caching problem that was found during ad-hoc 
testing.  The corrected code was promoted to Production and validated. 
 
Project Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:  None 
 
 
UI Employer Maintain Profile Information  
   
This project will leverage the Pennsylvania assets (to the extent possible) and existing UISIM artifacts to 
capture Employer registration and profile information, and maintain it in the new Employer data model.  
The new data model will be built based on the PA. data model.  Wire frame screens will be developed 
from the PA assets and presented to the users to validate the PA use cases and other analysis artifacts.  
The validated artifacts will then be used along with the existing code to develop the Registration and 
Profile maintenance services for NYSDOL.  The project will also incorporate the deliverables from the 
proposed project named UI Employer Employer Account Adjustment Section (EAAS) Transfer 
Experience. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010   (Agile Development Project) 
 
Project Status: The project will deliver the processes related to an employer registering with DOL first as a 
customer, second as a Unemployment Insurance employer, and third to maintain the employer's account 
(name, address, agents, preferences etc.) while they are a business in NYS.     
 
Sprint Goals: Complete Validations and Error messages for the Agricultural employer screens.  Develop 
screens for Business and Domestic employers.  Create Staging tables.  Develop requirements for an 
Employer landing page and storing evidence. 
 
Customer Meeting - A Customer Meeting was held this week to update them on the status of the project. 
 
Sprint Timeline six weeks, Started: 8/19/2010, Planned End Date: 9/01/2010,  Timeline Status: Currently 
on schedule. 
 
Sprint Status: We are currently one week into the sprint and currently scheduled to complete on time.  
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week:  
 
Worked on coding the screen validations for the Agricultural employer screens.  
 
Worked on developing Staging tables from the Pennsylvania data model for storing the 
intermediate Registration data.  
 
Worked on finalizing the User Interface specifications for the Agricultural employers.   
 
Worked on developing the User Interface specifications for the Business and Domestic 
employers.   
 
Worked on developing the Business and Household Liability screens, the Business Location and 
Confirmation screens, and the Technical Difficulties screen.   
 
Worked on developing the process model for use case 6 and use case 7 from Pennsylvania. 
 
Project Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:  None 
 
 
UI Employer Registration  
   
This project will encompass the modernization of the UI employer registration process.  The scope 
includes core processing for new registrations from all employer types, providing new interfaces for the 
various sources of registration, and employer profile maintenance.   
 
Core processing will include an automated search of the Department of Labor and the Department of 
Taxation and Finance (DTF) databases to determine if the employer already exists.  It also includes 
automated rules to determine if the system can register the employer, rules for the system to determine 
liability and check for reimbursable type employers, and system creation and management of workflow 
when human tasks are required.     
 
The to-be processes will be modeled using the IBM Business Process Modeler.  After refinement in 
conjunction with the architect group, the developers and integration team will import the models into their 
development tools to complete the business process development. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 (Agile Development Project)   
 
Project Status:  UI Employer Registration Composite Application has been deployed to the Production 
Environment and is currently accepting Employer Registrations from the Governor's Office of Regulatory 
Reform (GORR).  
 
Sprint Name: UI Employer Registration Go-Live; Timeline (5 weeks), Started: 6/07/2010, Planned End 
Date: 07/14/10, Timeline Status: Behind Schedule, (Ahead of Schedule, On Schedule, Behind Schedule, 
Blocked, On-Hold)   
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week: 
 
Continued to process and monitor all GORR XMLs in the new Registration Automated system. 
 
Fixed the Scheduler Service; it was making duplicate calls to the service, causing the duplicate 
records in the database. 
 
Emergency Request for deployment was sent. (Issue is resolved) 
 
Bugs Fixed: 
o 
Unable to determine liability bug. (Payroll date is after the subject date) (Fixed & Tested 
till staging). 
o 
NYS100YtpeCd for accession & Update (Fixed & Tested till staging). 
 
Email Sent to all the EREG users for their access to EREG System Going live this week. (Two 
users are having issues) 
 
Working on Automation Tally Emails for Accession & Updates. 
 
Project impediments impacting progress and actions to mitigate:  None at this time. 
 
The tentative date to begin accepting Employer Registrations from our DOL Internet web site is tentatively 
scheduled for Wednesday, August 25, 2010. 
 
 
UI Employer Tax Ledger Replacement  
   
This project will replace the current employer ledger with a newer, and easier to use ledger.  The current 
ledger was written several decades ago and is no longer able to efficiently handle today’s UI tax 
business.  Currently the ledger is not capable of accounting for two penalty liabilities.  These liabilities 
must be maintained on a separate Penalty System.  Maintenance of employer accounts is largely a 
manual process that requires extensive training for staff to become productive in the required tasks.  
Currently, few adjustments to the ledger are automated. This project would also separate the financial 
information from that other non-financial information that is stored in the same file structure. 
 
The scope of this project will include the ability to process remittance adjustments, post returns, 
payments, and voluntary payments to an Employer Account, create employer payments online, perform 
daily remittance balancing, and interface with NYS Department of Taxation and Finance late filer 
information and Failure to file data.   
 
It will also include the ability to generate an on-demand count of the number of employers that would be 
considered delinquent at the given point in time that the query is executed, produce a daily pre-
delinquency count and store the information for review, select employers to receive a pre-delinquency 
notice (NYS45G) and generate a sample of the data to be printed on the NYS45G.    
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 Agile Development 
 
Schedule:  POC Sprint: June 21, 2010 until Sept 30, 2010: In Progress 
 
Status Summary:  The team identified the Post Receivables to Ledger and the Pay Benefits Use Cases to 
be modeled and presented to UID customer. The project EPAS resource has executed code for the Post 
Receivable to Ledger. Additional questions were generated and documented for the PA Architect. A 
spreadsheet was started that will document what methods are calling other components. The team is 
close to understanding the ledger update process. The customer status meeting was held. 
 
Accomplishments: 
 
Two transaction types for presentation to the customer were identified. 
 
Modeling of the Employer and Benefits Use Cases and transactions continued. 
 
 
UI Systems Improvement Project  
   
The purpose of the Unemployment Insurance Systems Improvement (UISIM) Initiative is to design, 
develop, test and implement a new comprehensive system design for a new Unemployment Insurance 
System. 
 
The base computer software systems that run the nearly $3.5 billion New York State Unemployment 
Insurance (UI) program today were originally written more than 30 years ago, using languages and file 
structures that are not easily maintainable or easily adaptable to current technologies, such as self-
service applications via the Internet. Modifications and enhancements have been made to these systems 
over the years; however, these existing systems cannot effectively and efficiently support the demands 
being placed on the Unemployment Insurance Division (UID). The total system to be developed will be 
tailored to meet or exceed New York State UID needs. The goal is to replace the existing capabilities with 
a new system(s) that will be able to support the UI program into the future.  
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010  Projects Currently In-Progress - see individual project reports for 
status details. 
 
Status: UISIm activities continued for Core Foundational, Employer, Benefits and Appeals domains using 
the PA analysis, design and development assets.  We continue to maintain a utility metric spreadsheet on 
the completeness of the development of use case functionality for UISIm.  We held a customer meeting 
with UI Divsion directors and stakeholders this week.  Our next customer meeting is scheduled for 
Thursday, September 2nd.              
 
Legacy (System Improvement) Projects: 
 
Unemployment Insurance eFile Core Application and Address Change 
 
Virtual Call Queuing Callback Manager Project  
 
xPression Implementation (LGAS Replacement) 
 
Address Normalization 
 
Additional Claims 
 
Federal Tax Offset 
 
UI Benefits Web Chat 
 
UISIm Core Technical Foundational Projects: 
 
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) Security and Monitoring  
 
Common Authentication / Identity Management  
 
EA Foundational Services 
 
UISIm Core Functional Foundational Projects: 
 
Unemployment Insurance Appeal Board System Replacement 
 
Unemployment Insurance Benefit Ledger 
 
Unemployment Insurance Tax Ledger 
 
UISIm Functional Employer Account Projects: 
 
Unemployment Insurance Employer Registration 
 
Unemployment Insurance Tax Rating  
 
Unemployment Insurance Automate Multi-Year Tax Rating 
 
Unemployment Insurance Employer Home Page Consolidated Accounts Receivable 
 
Audit and Investigation Case Management System 
 
UI Modernize Employer (Program) for DOLCMS:  UISIm - Maintain Employer Profile 
 
UISIm Functional Benefit Account Projects:  
 
Unemployment Insurance Benefit Intake (including Shared Work) 
 
Unemployment Insurance Certification  
 
Unemployment Insurance Adjudication  
 
 
UI Tax Rating - Automate Multi-Year Tax Rating Process  
   
The scope of this project is the migration of Cúram and Rating Workbook transaction data from the 
mainframe into the Enterprise Data Model. Analyze this data and design the multi-year BCA (Benefit 
Charge Adjustment) of the UI Employer Tax rating process. Building on the original UI Tax Rate Project 
base functionality, extend the single year BCA tax rating processes to allow multi-year BCA tax rating 
processes to be performed. 
 
The approach that will be used to complete this project begins with the UI Tax Rating Core Project team 
scoping out bodies of work to be passed off to agile teams. The agile teams consisting of developers and 
analysts will be formed for the duration required to complete each body of work. The bodies of work will 
be scoped out so that they can be completed in 20 day time frames. Each body of work (iteration) will 
consist of a complete deliverable. The first bodies of work to be assigned to the agile teams are: migrate 
Cúram tax rating system data from the mainframe to the enterprise data model; migrate Rating 
Workbooks data from the mainframe to the enterprise data model; analyze the migrated data for use in 
supporting multi-year BCA processes; design the multi-year BCA tax rating processes. 
 
There will also be a core team of developers and analysts formed for the duration of the entire project. 
The core team will be responsible for overseeing and coordinating the work done by each of the agile 
teams and delivering the final complete product. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010   (Agile Development Project) 
 
Project Status: The project will allow users to perform prior/multiple year tax rating operations in a 
production WebSphere Application Server (WAS) environment, and is scheduled to complete in 
December of 2010.  The team met with the product owner this week to update them on the status of the 
project.        
 
Sprint Goals: Convert Total Transfer and Void Total Transfer transactions from Curam into the new 
Enterprise database, Develop Determination of Liability process, and develop prior year simple Total 
Transfer and Void Total Transfer of experience process. 
 
Sprint Timeline six weeks, Started: N/A, Planned End Date: N/A,  Timeline Status: N/A. 
 
Sprint Status: The sprint completed on 8/13.  Planning is underway for the next sprint.  
 
Sprint Accomplishments this Week:     
 
Worked on correcting the Experience Rating subject date for employers that are the successor in 
a Partial Transfer of experience.   
 
Completed the conversion of Curam transaction (about 9,000 records) into the Test environment 
and worked with the Analysts to validate the converted transactions.     
 
Completed the loading of 2007 - 2009 Voluntary Contribution Negative Balance Adjustment 
transactions into the Development environment.  
 
Worked on analyzing the workbook data from 2007 - 2010 loaded into Oracle Staging tables.    
 
Worked on Developer testing of the Determinations of Liability and Subject Date Change code.  
 
Worked on analyzing how to handle the end/beginning of year application locks.       
 
Completed the second round of formal testing the prior year Total Transfer and prior year Void 
total transfer processes in the Test environment.  
 
Corrected the defects that were identified and deployed the corrected code to the Test 
environment. 
 
Impediments Impacting Progress and Actions to Mitigate:    None 
 
 
UI Virtual Call Queuing Callback Manager Project  
   
The Unemployment Insurance Division (UID) has moved from a local office model for claims intake, to a 
self-service model.  As such, the primary means of receiving Unemployment Insurance claims is through 
the Internet and through Interactive Voice Response (IVR).  Many claims that are submitted through the 
IVR are incomplete. Claimants complete their applications by calling the Department of Labor and 
verbally completing the application with the help of a Telephone Call Center (TCC) Agent. TCC Agents 
input the remaining claim information into the Unemployment Insurance computer system as they speak 
with the claimants.  There are two TCCs in the Department of Labor.  One is in Glendale, NY and the 
other is in Troy, NY. The two call centers are in a Virtual Call Center (VCC) configuration. There are 
approximately 250 total TCC Agents.  Calls are routed to one of the two centers where the application is 
completed with the assistance of an Agent.  Many requests for information and claim status are also 
received in the TCCs. 
 
The volume of calls received in the Telephone Call Centers varies.  Monday sees the highest volume.  
Mass layoffs and poor economic conditions also create a high volume of calls to the TCCs.  During those 
peak volume periods, claimants may wait an excessive amount of time before connecting to an Agent.  
This causes unnecessary 800 line costs and disgruntled claimants due to perceived poor customer 
service.   
 
The Unemployment Insurance Division has investigated Virtual Call Queuing Management software to 
alleviate issues created by variable peaks in TCC call volumes.  Virtual Call Queuing Management 
software is capable of allowing a claimant to disconnect and yet maintain their place in the incoming call 
queue.  When an Agent becomes available, the system calls the claimant and makes the connection to 
the Agent.  Software that has been investigated thus far also has the option of allowing claimants to 
schedule a call back at a date and time that is convenient for the claimant. 
 
The purpose of this project is to:  Develop a set of business and technical requirements needed to 
determine the hardware, software and associated cost estimates for a Virtual Call Queuing Management 
system for the Unemployment Insurance Division's Telephone Call Centers.  
Procure software and hardware necessary for implementing a Virtual Call Queuing Management system 
for the Unemployment Insurance Division.  
Install, configure and test Virtual Call Queuing Management products.  
Implement the Virtual Call Queuing Management system by training the UI Division administrators and 
staff, preparing for ongoing Planning and Technology support, and transitioning the products into the 
production environment. 
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 A meeting was conducted to discuss results of the assessment of the 
call queuing software.  Several options were presented to improve performance.  No decision has been 
made yet on what will be the next step.   A design meeting was held to review in more detail the steps 
involved in the software upgrade part of this project.  There are several outstanding items that more 
information is needed on but so far we have not identified any major issues.  We have decided that the 
vendors can have VPN access to the servers for loading the software and doing the configuration and 
custom coding work.   The paper work to enable this to happen is quickly going through the system.  Port 
assignment and network firewall requirements for the various servers are being finalized.  Next week we 
will provide the vendor a test of the current system so that they can see how the screen pops and agent 
workstation currently works.   
 
 
Unix Servers Admin  
   
We are proposing to purchase two Power6 595’s. One of the P6 595 will be used for our 
Production/Staging environment to provide readily available hardware resources for our SOA initiative.  A 
third P6 595 will be used for Development/Testing/Disaster Recovery environment.  We are also 
requesting to upgrade our P5 -570’s with additional memory and storage.  
 
In addition, the Building 12 server room is in need of improvements to address issues with inadequate 
cooling capacity, security, replacement of floor tiles and re-cabling.  We propose moving the current 
server room from BD – 4 to BD-15, as this space would require less investment to bring up to date to 
meet our current needs.  
 
The NYS Department of Labor (NYS DOL) relies heavily on the AIX server environment to support the 
development of J2EE applications that run on WebSphere Application Server. With the implementation of 
a service oriented architecture and the advent of UISIM these systems are at capacity and require 
additional hardware.  The current systems will not be able to support expected growth in development 
and operation of modernized applications and/or services. 
 
The B-12 server room in BD-4 is in need of modernization and the space is very limited in terms of 
allowing for future growth.    
 
Current Status Report:   8/20/20 The CTIP database server has move from P690 to P650. The 
paperwork to decommission the P690 has been submitted.  Installation of monitoring software continues. 
 
 
Videoconferencing Phase 2  
   
To expand on our initial implementation of video conferencing we need to add additional capabilities to 
facilitate ease of meetings between DOL staff in geographically dispersed locations.   
  
Current Status Report:  08/20/10 A weekly meeting was held to discuss implementation and locations. 
We have identified which units should be included in the next phase of implementation the asset 
management request is being completed..  
 
 
VMware View User Mobility 2010  
 
The purpose of this project is to provide a technical infrastructure to enable Department of Labor (DOL) 
staff to access and use DOL resources from home or alternate work locations.  
 
By providing a virtual desktop computing environment accessible world wide via secure socket layer 
(SSL) virtual private network (VPN), DOL staff will have portable environments capable of working from 
any location where Internet network connectivity is available. A user will be able to access their desktop 
and files from any location provided they have an Internet connection. 
 
All data will reside on Department of Labor owned storage devices. All virtual desktops could be 
downloaded or accessed by staff using a variety of hardware in a secure environment. This virtual 
solution is capable of being interfaced with disaster recovery solutions, with minimal effort as compared to 
other options. 
 
Current Status Report:  08/20/2010 All of the project hardware and software purchase requests have 
been created. Requests have got the budget approvals. Team started work on Solution Architecture. 
Team is waiting for goods to arrive.  
 
 
Voice Web Server Replacement  
   
The purpose of this project is to test possibilities for the replacement of the Virtual Call Center (VCC) 
Servers and replace them. 
 
The current VCC servers are over 6 years old and in need of replacement. The specific cards that allow 
the voice communication with the end user are not supported on modern operating systems and need to 
be replaced. An initial investigation has also identified that the Websphere Voice Server (WVS) is at end 
of life and will no longer be supported by the vendor. A replacement to WVS needs to be identified.  
  
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 The customer meeting was postponed this week due to vacations.  
The technical team continues establishing the test server by transferring the software from the server.  
Once the server is established we will test the software.  It is anticipated that this testing will occur next 
week.  
 
 
WIA Financial Management  
Develop a system that will allow the Local Workforce Investment Areas (LWIAs) to request the drawdown 
of cash to operate their programs on a month-to-month basis and for the LWIAs to report on their monthly 
expenditures. 
 
The New York State Department of Labor is required by Workforce Investment Act (WIA) regulations to 
operate a fiscal and management accountability information system as one of the Statewide Workforce 
Investment Activities.  The system must record and report on financial activities involving the Local 
Workforce Investment Areas (LWIAs). The component of the system that records and monitors the daily 
LWIA cash drawdown requests has been completed; however, the cash side of the system has not been 
made available to LWIAs pending completion of the expenditure side.  The Local Area Expenditure 
Reporting component of the system needs to be completed pending a few modifications to be fully 
functional for reporting purposes. The expenditure reporting function of the system will allow the thirty-
three LWIAs to report their required monthly expenditures and obligations online. This system will contain 
standard reporting formats with appropriate edits, checks and balances to produce the cumulative 
expenditure and obligation information needed to accurately complete the required federal financial 
reports.  The expenditure information that is reported electronically will also be exported to the Financial 
Accounting and Reporting System (FARS) to be properly accounted for in the Department of Labor's 
official designated accounting system. 
  
Current Status Report:   This project has been on hold since 7/18/2008 due to resource conflicts. 
 
 
WIA Incentive Grant - Updates to JobZone  
   
NYSDOL and NYSED co-authored an application and were awarded a WIA Incentive Grant supporting 
the NYSED Literacy Zone initiative. Among the funded deliverables are upgrades and revisions to the 
JobZone system and the development of a desktop application mirroring the core functions of the 
JobZone website. 
 
The Offline JobZone application should include: 
1. Searchable occupational profiles based on the latest available version of the O*NET    database 
2. Occupational Videos 
3. Searchable, by name and major, college profiles using latest available information from IPEDS 
and CIP databases. 
4. Journal module to document job search efforts, including contacts, prospects, appointments, and 
plans. Modeled on the form available at 
http://www.labor.state.ny.us/workforcenypartners/PDFs/WorkSearchRecord.pdf 
5. The Assess Yourself, Interest Profiler, Work Importance Profiler, and Skill Survey modules as 
currently found in JobZone. 
6. A resume builder tool incorporating such common fields as, Contact Info, Work Experience, 
Summary of Qualifications, Volunteer Experience, Education History, Awards and 
Accomplishments, Licenses and Certifications, Professional Associations and Military History. 
7. Cover Letter Builder 
8. Reference list builder 
9. Resource list specific to an incarcerated population including such information as contact 
information for ex-offender advocacy agencies, info on obtaining vital records (e.g., ID, Birth 
Certificate, Social Security card), occupational restrictions due to conviction history, etc. 
 
A sign-in and storage mechanism to save customer search activities and records across multiple sessions  
 
Current Status Report:  8/20/2010 Analysis work sessions continues.  Detail analysis on the JobZone 
requirements for both the web and off line versions continue. A risk analysis has been performed.   
The approach for development is being planned.  The requirements will be prioritized and estimates 
provided to select the order of development.  The weekly Customer meeting was conducted. 
 
 
xPression Implementation  
   
This project is to implement the Document Correspondence software xPression in our open systems 
environment.   The first program area to use this software is Unemployment Insurance - Employer.  It will 
replace their mainframe based correspondence letter writing system.   The new system will also interface 
with the NYS Department of Labor's Electronic Document Management system for storing/archiving of 
document images.   
 
Current Status Report:  08/06/10 08/20/10 We are still working on content errors and prioritizing the 
enhancement requests for the future.  We have set up weekly meetings to review priority and progress.  
As soon as our users all have Windows 2007, we will turn over the maintenance of content errors to the 
groups that own the documents.  Our next effort will be to test and implement the code that allows the 
user to maintain the user access and document maintenance.  
 
 
