United States Department of Agriculture
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
APHIS 
in the 
Global Trade 
Arena
Global Trade Agreements
Protecting American agriculture is the
basic charge of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture’s (USDA) Animal and Plant
Health Inspection Service (APHIS).
APHIS has employees stationed across
the country and around the world to
accomplish this mission.
Several global trade agreements help 
APHIS to carry out its mission, the most
important of which are the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the
World Trade Organization (WTO) Sanitary
and Phytosanitary (SPS) Agreement, the suc-
cessor to the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT). Both have helped the
United States become more competitive in
the international trade arena, especially in
the area of agriculture.
APHIS works to safeguard American agricul-
ture by keeping destructive foreign pests and
diseases out of the United States. Should an
exotic disease threaten U.S. borders, it’s
APHIS’ role to combat the threat and pre-
vent an outbreak. By ensuring the health and
well-being of animals and plants nationwide,
APHIS helps improve agricultural productiv-
ity and competitiveness and contributes to
the national economy and the public health.
This growing interest in agricultural trade
has created a more visible role for APHIS and
expanded our mission to ensure that new
trade opportunities beneﬁt the United States
without creating new threats from harmful
exotic pests and diseases. APHIS is delegated
as the primary negotiator for SPS-related
trade issues. In that role, APHIS has the
responsibility for regulating the importation
of food and agricultural commodities into
the United States as well as establishing SPS
requirements that set the boundaries for safe
international agricultural trade. The need for
such SPS requirements is fully recognized by
NAFTA and the WTO.
APHIS’ dedicated workforce strives to meet
the needs of an ever-expanding customer
base. We use state-of-the-art technology to
keep up with trends in agriculture and inter-
national trade as well as other pertinent
issues. All of our work enhances the United
States’ ability to buy and sell agricultural
products in the international marketplace,
fortiﬁes our abundant, safe, and diverse food
supply, and contributes to the health of U.S.
public and private lands.
NAFTA, a trilateral trade pact between the
United States, Canada, and Mexico, went into
effect in January 1994. The GATT was estab-
lished in the wake of World War II, and its
successor organization, the WTO, was cre-
ated in 1995 after a series of trade negotia-
tions known as the Uruguay Round.
Collectively, the WTO’s more than 140 mem-
ber countries account for more than 90 per-
cent of world trade. Decisions are made
based on the consensus of the entire WTO
membership.
During NAFTA and WTO negotiations, coun-
tries embarked on a historic effort to reform
agricultural trade. Under both agreements,
countries are required to base their SPS
measures on scientiﬁc evidence. In short,
countries are now required to scientiﬁcally
justify their reasons for impeding the free
2 APHIS in the Global Trade Arena
rivers, are not. Pests and diseases must be
able to travel in order to spread. If the path is
blocked by a mountain range down the mid-
dle of a country, then the disease is naturally
conﬁned to one side of that country.
ﬂow of trade. With the reductions in quotas
and tariffs that are a result of WTO and
NAFTA, there is a greater potential for coun-
tries to use pests and diseases as artiﬁcial
barriers to trade. In order to exclude agricul-
tural products presented for importation, a
country must be able to scientiﬁcally docu-
ment that allowing such importation would
create an unacceptable risk of introducing
foreign pests or disease. To be designated as
quarantine signiﬁcant, a pest or disease must
not exist in the importing country or be
present only in a limited area that is under
ofﬁcial control.
The states of Sonora and Yucatan in Mexico
are prime examples. While other regions 
in Mexico still have outbreaks of classical
swine fever (CSF), the prevalence of the
disease in Sonora and Yucatan is low. Based
on the principle of regionalization and a risk
analysis, the United States accepts imports of
fresh (chilled or frozen) pork from Sonora
and Yucatan even though other regions of
the country are not allowed to export pork 
to the United States because of the presence
of CSF.
NAFTA and WTO requirements for risk
assessments are intended to make countries’
SPS regulations more transparent and scien-
tiﬁcally based. Countries also are required to
be consistent in their risk management prac-
tices. Agricultural ofﬁcials cannot treat one
country different from another when the
importation of their goods would result in
the same pest risk. It is important to note,
however, that NAFTA and WTO clearly recog-
nize the rights of countries to set their own
levels of protection.
This growing
interest in
agricultural trade
has created a 
more visible role 
for APHIS and
expanded our
mission to ensure
that new trade
opportunities
beneﬁt the United
States without
creating new
threats from
harmful exotic 
pests and diseases.
Regionalization
Plant health ofﬁcials refer to regionalization
as “area freedom.” The name is different, but
the results are the same. When Pennsylvania
ofﬁcials discovered an outbreak of plum pox
in October 1999, area freedom kept the
entire State, and perhaps the entire Nation,
from being quarantined. Under area free-
dom, the disease, which infects stone fruit,
resulted in a quarantine only in the Adams
County, PA, area where plum pox was
detected. Other major U.S. stonefruit-
producing areas, such as Washington, can
continue to export peaches, apricots, plums,
and almonds.
In addition, the WTO and NAFTA commit
countries to recognizing disease- and pest-
free areas within a country even if a particu-
lar pest or disease exists elsewhere in the
nation. This concept is perhaps the most sig-
niﬁcant policy and regulatory issue facing
APHIS and our trade partners. It has, how-
ever, created new opportunities for the
United States, as well as other countries that
may have a pest in one region but be free of
it elsewhere.
Should one nation disagree with another’s
trade requirements, the requirements can be
challenged through NAFTA and the WTO’s
dispute settlement processes. A disagree-
ment arising between Mexico, Canada, or 
the United States could be ﬁrst addressed
through NAFTA. In both NAFTA and the
WTO, a panel is appointed to review the situ-
ation and make a ruling. If a country fails to
recognize the panel’s ruling, the WTO
provides a mechanism for proceeding.
The concept of regionalization is founded on
the longstanding idea that import require-
ments should be based on geography and sci-
ence rather than on politics. The political
borders between countries and delimiting
states within a country are invisible; geo-
graphic boundaries, such as mountains and
APHIS in the Global Trade Arena 3
International Standards
International and North American
Organizations for Plant Health
The WTO recognizes the International Plant
Protection Convention (IPPC) when it comes
to setting plant health standards. In effect
since 1952, the IPPC is a multilateral treaty
that promotes “. . . common and effective
action to prevent the spread and introduc-
tion of pests of plants and plant products 
and to promote measures for their control.”
The treaty is administered by the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United
Nations. Currently, more than 100 countries
adhere to the IPPC.
The WTO and NAFTA encourage countries to
base their SPS regulations on international
standards. Countries are required to publish
proposed regulations in order to give other
nations a chance to comment before the
regulations go into effect. This process is
intended to reduce unnecessary variance
between countries’ technical health stan-
dards—differences that are often the cause
of trade disputes. It is a top priority of APHIS
to work with our trading partners to develop
internationally acceptable standards. We’ve
already made great progress in this area with
some nations, especially Canada and Mexico.
APHIS works with and recognizes a number
of standards-setting organizations that help
determine the rules for international trade.
L’Ofﬁce International des Epizooties 
(OIE) and Animal Health
In 1989, an IPPC Secretariat was created to
coordinate activities for the IPPC and to sup-
port the development and administration of
international phytosanitary standards. Given
the importance of international standards to
future agricultural trade, the technical and
regulatory nature of plant health issues
covered by the IPPC, and APHIS’ scientiﬁc
expertise in this area, APHIS has assumed
the role of lead U.S. agency participating in
activities of the IPPC.
It is a top priority
of APHIS to work
with our trading
partners to develop
internationally
acceptable
standards. We’ve
already made 
great progress 
in this area with
some nations,
especially Canada
and Mexico.
The IPPC objectives are to develop interna-
tional plant health standards, promote the
harmonization of plant quarantine activities
with emerging standards, facilitate the dis-
semination of phytosanitary information,
support plant health assistance to developing
countries, and resolve disputes.
One of the most important standards-setting
organizations, Paris-based OIE has more
than 150 member countries. It was started in
the 1920’s in response to the appearance of
rinderpest in Europe from Pakistan. Each
member country has one vote and one dele-
gate. Its major functions are to collect and
disseminate information on the distribution
and control of animal diseases, coordinate
research on contagious animal diseases, and
standardize rules for international trade in
animals and animal products.
OIE aims to ensure that scientiﬁcally justi-
ﬁed measures are used to govern interna-
tional trade in animals and animal products.
The WTO has designated the OIE as the
international forum for setting animal
health standards, reporting global animal
health situations and status, and presenting
guidelines and recommendations on animal
health issues.
The North American Plant Protection
Organization (NAPPO)—a regional plant
protection organization of the IPPC created
in 1976—coordinates the efforts among
Canada, the United States, and Mexico to
protect their plant resources from the entry,
establishment, and spread of plant pests
while ensuring the free ﬂow of trade between
the three nations. APHIS employees are fre-
quently assigned to NAPPO committees
charged with reviewing technical standards
or reviewing new methods for pest control.
4 APHIS in the Global Trade Arena
For example, APHIS employees worked with
NAPPO to develop guidelines for the release
of nonnative organisms to control weeds.
In addition to establishing plant quarantine
standards, NAPPO also has developed a pest
risk analysis (PRA) standard. PRAs are gener-
ally done for every agricultural commodity
entering the United States. The PRA identi-
ﬁes foreign pests that could harm U.S. agri-
culture and the level of risk related to a
particular commodity. By adhering to the
PRA standard developed by NAPPO, the
United States, Mexico, and Canada can all be
assured they’re using the same approach to
evaluate pest risks.
In addition to working with such standards-
setting organizations as the OIE, IPPC, and
Codex, the United States is also involved in
the proposed negotiation of Free Trade Areas
for the Americas (FTAA). In January 1995,
the United States and 33 governments from
Central and South America and the
Caribbean established the foundation for the
FTAA, making a joint declaration of their
commitment to the hemispheric integration
of economics and trade by 2005. FTAA has
the potential of accelerating greater intra-
hemispheric trade, particularly in agricul-
ture, given the signiﬁcant role that
agriculture plays in the economies of most
Latin American and Caribbean countries.
The FTAA initiative reﬂects current U.S.
trade policy aimed at deepening our trade
relations with newly emerging or developing
economies of our hemisphere.
Codex and Free Trade Areas 
for the Americas
As a result of WTO and the pending FTAA,
Latin America has evolved into an important
region in terms of new markets for U.S.
agricultural goods. APHIS has played an
instrumental role in establishing trade
relationships with these countries.
The Codex Alimentarius Commission for
food safety standards is the third interna-
tional standards-setting organization recog-
nized by the WTO. Jointly managed by the
World Health Organization and the FAO,
Codex, established in 1963, facilitates world
food trade by establishing international stan-
dards based on accepted scientiﬁc knowl-
edge. Codex deals with subjects such as food
additives, pesticide residues, and food label-
ing. Codex expert committees are composed
of representatives from government regula-
tory agencies, such as USDA’s Food Safety
and Inspection Service, the international sci-
entiﬁc community, and industry.
The OIE, IPPC, NAPPO, and Codex have
earned prominent roles in determining the
substance, direction, priorities, and out-
comes of SPS requirements. Domestic
groups have grown increasingly aware of
these organizations and the importance of
their activities, resulting in increased inter-
est and expectations concerning the develop-
ment, establishment, and amendment of
international standards, particularly from
the standpoint of dispute resolution.
APHIS in the Global Trade Arena 5
Asia–Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation
Without the creation of the WTO and 
NAFTA, such trade relationships would not
be possible. It’s a principal role of APHIS to
make sure the United States and our trading
partners adhere to the SPS rules set forth by
the WTO and NAFTA as well as the other
relevant standards-setting organizations.
While trade agreements have helped to open
up new markets for the United States and
other countries, APHIS must ensure that
U.S. agriculture is protected in all endeavors
and that agricultural imports from foreign
countries do not create new pathways for
pests. APHIS’ role in the global marketplace
will continue to increase as the United 
States expands current trade relationships
and establishes new partnerships with
developing countries.
Another example of U.S. efforts to broaden
commercial relations beyond Europe and
Canada is APHIS’ participation in the Asia–
Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation (APEC). APEC
was established in 1989 to promote coopera-
tion in trade and other economic issues.
What started out as an organization with
12 member countries has nearly doubled in
size to encompass countries as diverse as
Australia, Brunei, and China. As a member of
APEC, the United States attends regular
meetings to discuss such issues as trade lib-
eralization, technology transfer, investment,
energy, and other topics of mutual interest.
It was not until 1995, however, that APEC
members agreed to address agricultural
trade. At this time, a group of agricultural
technical experts was formed to discuss
issues, including biotechnology and quaran-
tine and pest management.
For more information about APHIS
programs, visit the APHIS homepage at
http://www.aphis.usda.gov
In recent years,
APHIS has worked
hard to develop
technical working
relationships with
such nations as
Japan, South Korea,
and China. These
relationships have
been instrumental
in creating new
markets for 
U.S. agricultural
commodities.
APHIS recognizes the countries in the
Paciﬁc Rim region as strategically important
agricultural markets and plays a key role in
meetings of the APEC agricultural technical
experts. In recent years, APHIS has worked
hard to develop technical working relation-
ships with such nations as Japan, South
Korea, and China. These relationships have
been instrumental in creating new markets
for U.S. agricultural commodities. APHIS
was successful in March 2000 with helping
to open up the Chinese market to U.S. citrus.
Besides being economically signiﬁcant, this
agreement also helps pave the way for future
market opportunities.
6 APHIS in the Global Trade Arena
The U.S. Department of Agriculture prohibits discrimination in all its
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex,
religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or
family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons
with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of
program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact
USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720–2600 (voice and TDD).
To ﬁle a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Ofﬁce of Civil
Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW,
Washington, DC 20250–9410 or call (202) 720–5964 (voice and TDD).
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
United States
Department of
Agriculture
Animal and Plant
Health Inspection
Service
Miscellaneous 
Publication No. 1572
Issued September 2001
