Vehicle Rental Frequently Asked Questions 
 
How does the Car Rental Program work?  Through a joint agreement with the Western States 
Contracting Alliance, the State has secured discounted, contract rates with Enterprise Rent a Car, National 
Car Rental (Price Agreement No 9950) and Hertz Rent a Car (Price Agreement No. 9949).   The Price 
Agreement’s contains the account code that must be given to the reservation clerks in order to guarantee the 
state rates.  Enterprise, Hertz and National has provided our employees a variety of payment options. 
 
Note: When renting a car from Enterprise, Hertz or National, be sure to inform them of the State’s 
Corporate Number. This number will give the Enterprise, Hertz or National location you are renting from 
all of the information related to the States contract pertaining to rental rates, insurance requirements and 
other information.  No non-state employees may rent vehicles using these agreements. 
 
Who can rent and operate vehicles under the State Price Agreements for vehicle rental services? 
Any State Employee or Agent of the State may operate the vehicles. There is sometimes confusion whether 
or not non-state employees can operate the vehicles provided under the Enterprise/National and Hertz Price 
Agreements.    When ever a vehicle is rented by the state, that rental vehicle falls under the same rules and 
statutes that apply to state owned vehicles. They are as follows: 
 
Agent means:  A person or legal entity appointed in writing by a State agency to perform specific work.  An 
agent is not an independent contractor.  Agents, paid or unpaid, are subject to the direction and control of 
the agency.  An agency may not call people “agents” for the primary purpose of justifying their 
transportation in a State vehicle. 
 
Employee means: A person employed by the State of Oregon to do State business for whom the State 
withholds income tax, provides workers compensation coverage, and pays the workers’ compensation 
hour-tax.  Under this definition, workers provided by a temporary employment services agency and 
Department of Corrections inmates are not employees. 
 
Vehicle use and storage:  No person shall drive, operate or use, authorize or permit any person to drive, 
operate or use any motor vehicle as defined in ORS 283.305 for any purpose except for Official State 
business as defined in ORS 283.305 and by the rules of the Oregon Department of Administrative Services. 
   
 
In other words, when reserving a vehicle that is to be operated by a non-state employee, you need to ask the 
question whether that person would be allowed to operate a state owned vehicle as an agent or employee as 
defined above.  If the answer is no, then that person should NOT be driving a vehicle under these price 
agreements.   The Price Agreements state that the "traveler" is a person who is authorized to travel by a 
participant, however, per ORS 283.305, the Traveler must fall into either the Agent or Employee 
definition.   No other individuals are authorized to operate the vehicles under our Price Agreements with 
Enterprise/National and Hertz.   
 
The primary reason is the liability involved for the person driving the vehicle, the Contractor and the State. 
Our Price Agreements include full damage and liability insurance coverage and if a person was involved in 
an accident operating a rental vehicle, and it was discovered that the person was not a state employee or 
agent of the state, the state could ultimately end up being responsible for a non-state employee or non-state 
agent accident.   
 
Is it mandatory that I use the Car rental program?  Yes.  If you are in one of Enterprise, Hertz or 
National cities, you must use the program.  If you are in a city and there is no Enterprise, Hertz or National 
location there, you may use another provider; just remember to purchase the insurance when renting from 
another car rental company.   
 
Why do I need a credit card when renting a car?  The car rental companies, nationwide, require this of 
ALL customers.   This is for their protection when renting a car to an individual.  However, Enterprise, 
Hertz or National will provide agencies that have a documented need with agency direct billing accounts.  
All charges are accumulated and billed to the agency’s account.  In this case, a credit card will not be 
required as Enterprise, Hertz or National has the agency’s account information on file. 
 
 
Do I need to buy the extra insurance when renting a car?  NO. Enterprise, Hertz or National contract 
covers ALL damage occurred while using the car rental contract.  Also, the State’s insurance will cover any 
leased or rented vehicle operated by State Employees while on official business.   
 
 
What is the insurance coverage for renting cars in Foreign Countries?  The Insurance coverage the 
State of Oregon provides for car rentals in foreign countries varies from country to country.  Please call 
DAS Risk Management at (503) 378-5515 to verify the type of coverage's that are available for the 
countries you are traveling to and to determine if you will need to purchase additional insurance from the 
car rental company. 
 
 
What is the mileage limit under the Car rental program?  Unlimited miles although you must pickup 
and drop off the car at the same location.  Usually the airport you flew into. 
 
 
What if I need to drop the car off at a different location?  You can do a one way rental program, but 
you will be charged a per mileage charge from the origin point to the destination. There are select cities 
where no one-way charges are provided, please review the contract for these cities. A 7 day advanced 
reservation is required to do this.  It is critical that you get the 7 day reservation in, it will reduce the per 
mileage fee between the two locations. 
 
 
Do I need to be over 25 to rent a Car?  NO The State contact allows drivers 18 and older to rent a 
vehicle. 
 
 
Car Rental Confirmation Numbers.  It is recommended that you take the Car Rental Confirmation 
Number with you when you are going to pick up the rental.  This will expedite the rental process. 
 
 
Please walk around vehicle before departing from rental location.  If there are any 
marks/scratches/damage on vehicle please bring to the counters attention and have them sign off on it. 
 
 
I need to rent a car, who do I call to make a reservation?   You can either call Enterprise, Hertz or 
National or the States Travel Contractor to make the reservation.   
 
 
Updated 04/06/2010 
