UNITED  STATES  ENVIRONMENTAL  PROTECTION  AGENCY
REGION  8
999 18TH STREET  -  SUITE 300
DENVER,  CO   80202-2466
http://www.epa.gov/region08
June 14, 2004
Ref:
8MO
CERTIFIED MAIL
RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED
Mr. Patrick Goggins
Vermilion Ranch Co.
4419 Vermilion Road
Billings, Montana 59105
Re:
Findings of Violation and Administrative
Order for Compliance
Docket No. CWA-08-2004-0048
Dear Mr. Goggins:
Based on our review of all available information, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (“EPA”) has determined that you are in violation of the Clean Water Act, as
amended (“CWA”).  The CWA requires that an authorizing permit be obtained from the United
States Army Corps of Engineers prior to the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of
the United States.  See, 33 U.S.C. § 1311.  Waters of the United States include both surface
waters and wetlands as defined by 33 C.F.R. § 328.3.
Specifically, you have discharged fill material into waters of the United States without
authorization under the CWA.  These discharges of pollutants into the Yellowstone River, both
above and below the ordinary high water mark, have occurred on your property at a site located
in section 6, Township 2 North, Range 28 East, Yellowstone County, Montana.
Enclosed is a document entitled “Findings of Violation and Administrative Order for
Compliance” (“Order”) which specifies the nature of the violations and describes actions
necessary in order for you to achieve compliance with the CWA.  EPA’s authority for such action
is provided under section 309(a)(3) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1319(a)(3).  Pursuant to the Order,
within five days after you receive the Order you must inform EPA in writing of your intent to
fully comply with the Order.
The CWA requires the Administrator of EPA to take all appropriate enforcement action
necessary to secure prompt compliance with the CWA and any order issued thereunder.  Section
309 of the CWA authorizes a variety of possible enforcement actions, including filing of a civil
or criminal action, administrative penalty action, and/or debarment from Federal contracts and/or
Printed on Recycled Paper
loans for any noncompliance with the CWA or an order issued pursuant to the CWA.  Please be
advised that failure to comply with the requirements of the Order is a violation of the Order and
may be enforced through the mechanisms referenced above.  Please also be advised that the
issuance of this Order does not preclude civil or criminal actions in the U.S. District Court
pursuant to sections 309(b) or (c) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1319(b) or (c), or assessment of
civil penalties pursuant to sections 309(d) or (g) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1319(d) or (g), for
the violations cited in the Order or for any other violations that Patrick Goggins and/or the
Vermilion Ranch Co. may have committed prior to or may commit after the issuance of the
enclosed Order.
EPA has agreed to notify small businesses of their right to comment on regulatory
enforcement activities at the time of an Agency enforcement activity pursuant to the Small
Business Regulatory Enforcement and Fairness Act (“SBREFA”).  SBREFA does not eliminate
your responsibility to comply with the Act or this order, nor does it create any new rights or
defenses under law.  We have enclosed a SBREFA information sheet containing further
information on compliance assistance resources and tools available to small businesses.
Please review the Order carefully.  If you have any questions, the most knowledgeable
people on my staff are Sheldon Muller, Enforcement Attorney, at 303-312-6916, and Kris
Knutson, Enforcement Officer, at 406-457-5021.
Sincerely,
SIGNED
Carol Rushin
Assistant Regional Administrator
Office of Enforcement, Compliance
  and Environmental Justice
Enclosures
1.
Findings of Violation and Administrative Order for Compliance
2.
SBREFA Information Sheet
cc:
Mr. Allan Steinle, Corps, w/enclosures
Mr. John Arrigo, MDEQ
Mr. Jeff Ryan, MDEQ
Mr. James Darling, MFWP
Ms. LaVerne Ivie, YCD
2
UNITED STATES
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
REGION 8
IN THE MATTER OF:
)
)
Patrick Goggins
)
FINDINGS OF VIOLATION AND
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER FOR
COMPLIANCE
Vermilion Ranch Co.
)
4419 Vermilion Road
)
Docket No. CWA-08-2004-0048
Billings, MT 59105
)
)
)
)
Respondents.
)
                                                                      )
I.  STATUTORY AUTHORITY
1. This Findings of Violation and Administrative Order for Compliance (“Order”) is issued
pursuant to the authority vested in the Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (“EPA”) by section 309 of the Clean Water Act (“CWA”), 33 U.S.C. § 1319. 
This authority has been properly delegated to the Assistant Regional Administrator of the Office
of Enforcement, Compliance and Environmental Justice, EPA Region 8.  The Order is based on
the findings of violation of section 301(a) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1311(a), which, among other
things, prohibits the discharge of pollutants (e.g., dredged or fill material) into waters of the
United States except as in compliance with section 404 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
II.  FINDINGS OF VIOLATION
2. Respondent Patrick Goggins is an individual residing in or near Billings, Montana.  At all
relevant times, Respondent Vermilion Ranch Co. was a corporation organized under the laws of
the State of Montana.
3
3. At all relevant times, Respondents owned, controlled and or operated property located
near the midpoint of Section 6, Township 2 North, Range 28 East, Yellowstone County, Montana
containing a portion of the Yellowstone River (the “Site”).
4. In or around February and March 2003, Respondents discharged or caused to be
discharged at the Site, without prior authorization from the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (“Corps”), approximately 500-600 linear feet of fill material, including but not limited
to large concrete slabs and other soil and debris, into the Yellowstone River and on the
Yellowstone River’s banks below and above the river’s ordinary high water mark (“OHWM”).
5. The Yellowstone River is tributary to the Missouri River.  The Yellowstone and Missouri
Rivers are, and were at all relevant times, navigable, interstate waters.
6. On April 8, 2003, personnel from the Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks
inspected the Site and observed the concrete slabs and other soil and debris in and on the bank of
approximately 500-600 linear feet of the Yellowstone River.
7. On May 1, 2003, the Corps sent a letter to Respondent Patrick Goggins advising Mr.
Goggins that the Corps had become aware of the unauthorized discharges described in paragraph
4 of Section II of this Order and directing Mr. Goggins to cease and desist any further
unauthorized work or development at the Site.  On May 14, 2003, the Corps sent Mr. Goggins a
follow-up letter requesting that Mr. Goggins advise the Corps that he would take steps to remedy
the unauthorized discharge.
8. On June 23, 2003, the Montana Department of Environmental Quality sent a letter to Mr.
Goggins advising him that the unauthorized discharges described in paragraph 4 of Section II of
4
this Order also constituted a violation of the Montana Water Quality Act, Section 75-5-605 and
directing Mr. Goggins to take steps to remedy the violation.
9. The activities described in paragraph 4 of Section II of this Order were performed using
common earthmoving vehicles and equipment, including a front-end loader owned by
Respondents, a dump truck, and a tracked hoe, all of which were operated by Respondents and/or
by one or more individuals on behalf of Respondents.
10.The Yellowstone River bank area that was filled and disturbed by the actions of
Respondents described in paragraph 4 of Section II of this Order provided various functions and
values, including wildlife habitat for songbirds, raptors, mammals, reptiles and amphibians;
water quality enhancement; flood storage; and food chain support.
11.Respondents are each a "person" within the meaning of section 502(5) of the CWA, 33
U.S.C. § 1362(5).
12.The discharged fill materials described in paragraph 4 of Section II of this Order are, and
were at all relevant times, “fill material” within the meaning of 33 C.F.R. § 323.2(e) and
“pollutants” within the meaning of section 502(6) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1362(6).
13.The vehicles and equipment described in paragraph 9 of Section II of this Order are, and
were at all relevant times, each a “point source” within the meaning of section 502(14) of the
CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1362(14).
14.The Yellowstone and Missouri Rivers and the banks of the Yellowstone River at or
below the OHWM referenced in paragraph 5 of Section II of this Order are, and were at all
relevant times, “waters of the United States” within the meaning of 33 C.F.R. § 328.3(a) and
therefore “navigable waters” within the meaning of section 502(7) of the CWA,
5
33 U.S.C. § 1362(7).  Pursuant to 33 C.F.R. § 328.4(c)(1), the OHWM defines the limits of the
Corps’ jurisdiction over non-tidal waters in the absence of adjacent wetlands.
15.The placement of fill material into and on the banks of the Yellowstone River at or below
the OHWM constitutes the “discharge of pollutants” within the meaning of section 502(12) of
the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1362(12).
16.Section 301(a) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1311, prohibits, among other things, the
discharge of pollutants by any person into waters of the United States except as in compliance
with section 404 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
17.Section 404 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, sets forth a permitting system authorizing the
Secretary of the Army, acting through the Chief of Engineers of the Corps, to issue permits for
the discharge of dredged or fill material into the navigable waters, i.e., waters of the United
States.
18.33 C.F.R. § 323.3(a) specifies that, unless exempted pursuant to 33 C.F.R. § 323.4,
a permit issued by the Corps is required for the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters
of the United States.
19.Respondents are not and never have been authorized by a permit issued pursuant to
section 404 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, to conduct any of the activities described in
paragraph 4 of Section II of this Order.
20.Respondents’ activities described in paragraph 4 of Section II of this Order violate section
301 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1311.  Each discharge of pollutants from a point source by
Respondents into waters of the United States without the required permits issued pursuant to
section 404 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, constitutes a violation of section 301(a) of the CWA,
6
33 U.S.C. § 1311(a).  Each day the discharges remain in place without the required permits
constitutes an additional day of violation of section 301(a).
21.The removal of the fill material illegally discharged into waters of the United States at the
Site and restoration of the impacted waters to a condition that closely approximates their
condition and function prior to the discharge of the fill material, can be achieved as a practical
matter through commonly used methods of construction, digging, filling, revegetation, and best
management practices.
22.Activities to be carried out under this Order are remedial, not punitive, and are necessary
to achieve the CWA’s objective “to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the Nation’s waters,” as specified in section 101(a) of the CWA,
33 U.S.C. § 1251(a).  The removal and restoration described in paragraph 21 of Section II of this
Order are appropriate to alleviate actual and potential harm to water quality, aquatic habitat, and
wildlife habitat caused by Respondents’ unpermitted activities.
23.This Order was issued after consultation and coordination with the Corps’ Omaha
District, Helena Regulatory Office.
III.  ORDER
Based upon the foregoing FINDINGS OF VIOLATION, and pursuant to the authority vested
in the Administrator of the EPA pursuant to sections 308 and 309(a) of the CWA,
33 U.S.C. §§ 1318 and 1319(a), as properly delegated to the Assistant Regional Administrator of
the Office of Enforcement, Compliance and Environmental Justice, EPA Region 8, it is hereby
ORDERED:
7
1. Respondents shall immediately terminate all discharges of dredged or fill materials into
waters of the United States, now and in the future, unless specifically authorized by the Corps
under a valid permit issued pursuant to section 404 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.  This
prohibition includes all bank stabilization, mechanical land clearing, dredging, filling, grading,
leveling, installation of utilities, construction, and any other activities that result in a discharge of
dredged or fill material into waters of the United States.
2. Within forty-five (45) calendar days of the receipt of this Order, Respondents shall submit
to EPA for review and approval a Restoration Plan for the removal of the discharged fill
materials described in paragraph 4 of Section II of this Order and restoration of the area impacted
by the discharged fill.  The Restoration Plan shall be prepared in accordance with “U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency - Region VIII Section 404 Enforcement:  General Guidelines
for Removal and Restoration Plans,” attached hereto as Exhibit A.  Additionally, the Restoration
Plan shall:
a.
Include a detailed work plan and schedule for all of the work to be accomplished
by the Restoration Plan, including the application for any required permits, providing for
completion of all aspects of the restoration work no later than 
August 1, 2004.  The work plan shall, at a minimum, provide specific and detailed provisions
for:
i.
Removal of the fill materials discharged above and below the OHWM to
upland areas in full compliance with and with prior approval of all Federal, State and
local requirements, and providing a detailed description (including exact location) of the
8
site to where the material will be relocated and proof that the owner of such site has
approved the relocation of the discharged fill materials to such site;
ii.
Stabilization of any fill material which is placed adjacent to waters of the
United States to prevent incidental movement of this material into such waters; and
iii. Revegetation of the areas of the Yellowstone River bank impacted by the
unauthorized discharges described in paragraph 4 of Section II of this Order with plants
indigenous to the area which will prevent or reduce erosion of the river bank.  The
revegetation component of the plan must contain grasses, forbs,  and shrubs, and may
contain tree species.
b.
Be prepared by a qualified hydrologist/engineer experienced in stream and
wetland restoration, include detailed professional drawings of the restoration site, including
plan and profile drawings with control elevations, and comply with all Federal, State, and
local requirements; and
c.
Be prepared in accordance with “Nationwide Permits, Regional Conditions, State
of Montana, Omaha District - Corps of Engineers,” effective March 18, 2002, attached to
this Consent Order as Exhibit B, and “Special Public Notice - Reissuance of the Generic
Prohibitions Regarding the Use of Certain Materials as Fill in Waters of the United States,”
issued August 4, 2003, attached to this Consent Order as Exhibit C.
3. EPA will review the Restoration Plan and approve it or reject it with comments.  If EPA
rejects the Restoration Plan, Respondents shall, within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of
EPA’s rejection letter, submit a revised plan that corrects the deficiencies identified by EPA.
9
4. Upon receiving EPA’s written approval of the Restoration Plan, Respondents shall obtain
all necessary permits to implement the EPA-approved plan and then commence restoration
activities in accordance with the approved plan, including the time frames specified therein, and
all granted permits.  Respondents shall demonstrate that all necessary permits have been granted
by providing complete copies of all such permits, and any amendments thereto, to EPA within
seven (7) calendar days of issuance of each permit.
5. This Order is not a permit or an authorization to place or discharge dredged or fill
material in waters of the United States.  Respondents shall consult with the Corps at the
following address and telephone number to determine if any work to be performed pursuant to
this Order requires a permit from the Corps under section 404 of the CWA:
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Omaha District
Helena Regulatory Office
10 West Fifteenth Street, Suite 2200
Helena, Montana 59626
Telephone: (406) 441-1375
If required, Respondents shall obtain such permit(s) and provide a copy to EPA pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Section III of this Order prior to initiating any work that is to be performed
pursuant to this Order.
6. At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the anticipated completion of all restoration
activities in accordance with the approved Restoration Plan, Respondents shall notify EPA so
that EPA can arrange a final interagency inspection of the completed restoration activities.
7. Respondents shall submit three (3) copies of the Restoration Plan, all notifications, and
related correspondence to:
Kristine Knutson
10
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
10 West Fifteenth Street, Suite 3200
Helena, Montana 59626
Telephone: (406) 457-5021 
Facsimile:  (406) 457-5055
A copy of the restoration plan, all notifications, and related correspondence shall also be
provided to:
Sheldon H. Muller, 8ENF-L
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 8
999 18th Street, Suite 300
Denver, CO  80202-2466
Telephone:  303-312-6916
Facsimile:    303-312-6953
8. Any deliverables, plans, reports, specifications, schedules, and attachments required by
this Order are, upon approval by EPA, incorporated into this Order.  Any non-compliance with
such EPA-approved deliverables, plans, reports, specifications, schedules, and attachments shall
be deemed a failure to comply with this Order and subject to EPA enforcement.
9. Respondents shall allow, or use their best effort to allow, access by any authorized
representatives of EPA, the Corps, the Natural Resources Conservation Service, the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service, the Soil Conservation Service, the Montana Department of Environmental
Quality, the Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks and the Yellowstone County
Conservation District, or any of these agencies’ contractors, upon proper presentation of
credentials, to sites and records relevant to this Order for any of the following purposes:
11
a.
To inspect and monitor progress of the activities required by this Order;
b.
To inspect and monitor compliance with this Order; and
c.
To verify and evaluate data and other information submitted to EPA.
This Order shall in no way limit or otherwise affect EPA's authority, or the authority of any other
governmental agency, to enter the Site, conduct inspections, have access to records, issue notices
and orders for enforcement, compliance, or abatement purposes, or monitor compliance pursuant
to any statute, regulation, permit, or court order.
10. This Order shall be effective upon receipt.  Within five (5) calendar days of receipt of
this Order, Respondents shall inform EPA in writing of Respondents’ intent to fully comply with
the Order.
11.Please be advised that section 309(d) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1319(d), as modified by
the Civil Monetary Penalty Inflation Adjustment Rule, 69 Federal Register 7121 (February 13,
2004), authorizes civil penalties of up to $32,500 per day for each violation of section 301 of the
CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1311, and for each violation of an order issued by the Administrator of EPA
under section 309(a) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1319(a).  Additionally, section 309(g) of the
CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1319(g), authorizes EPA to impose administrative penalties for violations of
the CWA.  Further, section 309(c) of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. § 1319(c), authorizes fines and
imprisonment for willful or negligent violations of the CWA.  Issuance of this Order shall not be
deemed to be an election by the United States to forego any civil or criminal action to seek
penalties, fines, or other appropriate relief under the CWA for violations giving rise to the Order.
12.Compliance with the terms and conditions of the Order shall not be construed to relieve
Respondents of their obligation to comply with any applicable federal, state or local law.  Failure
12
by Respondents to complete the tasks described herein in the manner and time frame specified
pursuant to this Order may subject Respondents to a civil action under section 309 of the Clean
Water Act, 33 U.S.C. section 1319, for violation of this Order.
DATED this   10TH       day of June, 2004.
 SIGNED                                                              
Carol Rushin
Assistant Regional Administrator
Office of Enforcement, Compliance
   and Environmental Justice
IF YOU WOULD LIKE COPIES OF THE ATTACHMENTS, PLEASE CONTACT THE
REGIONAL HEARING CLERK.
THIS DOCUMENT WAS FILED IN THE RHC’S OFFICE ON JUNE 15, 2004.
13
